# Title
Vascular Contributions to Cognitive Impairment and
Dementia

# Abstract
This scientific statement provides an overview of the evidence on
vascular contributions to cognitive impairment and dementia. Vascular
contributions to cognitive impairment and dementia of later life are common.
Definitions of vascular cognitive impairment (VCI), neuropathology, basic
science and pathophysiological aspects, role of neuroimaging and vascular
and other associated risk factors, and potential opportunities for
prevention and treatment are reviewed. This statement serves as an overall
guide for practitioners to gain a better understanding of VCI and dementia,
prevention, and treatment. Writing group members were nominated by the writing group co-chairs
on the basis of their previous work in relevant topic areas and were
approved by the American Heart Association Stroke Council Scientific
Statement Oversight Committee, the Council on Epidemiology and Prevention,
and the Manuscript Oversight Committee. The writing group used systematic
literature reviews (primarily covering publications from 1990 to May 1,
2010), previously published guidelines, personal files, and expert opinion
to summarize existing evidence, indicate gaps in current knowledge, and,
when appropriate, formulate recommendations using standard American Heart
Association criteria. All members of the writing group had the opportunity
to comment on the recommendations and approved the final version of this
document. After peer review by the American Heart Association, as well as
review by the Stroke Council leadership, Council on Epidemiology and
Prevention Council, and Scientific Statements Oversight Committee, the
statement was approved by the American Heart Association Science Advisory
and Coordinating Committee. The construct of VCI has been introduced to capture the entire
spectrum of cognitive disorders associated with all forms of cerebral
vascular brain injury—not solely stroke—ranging from mild
cognitive impairment through fully developed dementia. Dysfunction of the
neurovascular unit and mechanisms regulating cerebral blood flow are likely
to be important components of the pathophysiological processes underlying
VCI. Cerebral amyloid angiopathy is emerging as an important marker of risk
for Alzheimer disease, microinfarction, microhemorrhage and macrohemorrhage
of the brain, and VCI. The neuropathology of cognitive impairment in later
life is often a mixture of Alzheimer disease and microvascular brain damage,
which may overlap and synergize to heighten the risk of cognitive
impairment. In this regard, magnetic resonance imaging and other
neuroimaging techniques play an important role in the definition and
detection of VCI and provide evidence that subcortical forms of VCI with
white matter hyperintensities and small deep infarcts are common. In many
cases, risk markers for VCI are the same as traditional risk factors for
stroke. These risks may include but are not limited to atrial fibrillation,
hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and hypercholesterolemia. Furthermore,
these same vascular risk factors may be risk markers for Alzheimer disease.
Carotid intimal-medial thickness and arterial stiffness are emerging as
markers of arterial aging and may serve as risk markers for VCI. Currently,
no specific treatments for VCI have been approved by the US Food and Drug
Administration. However, detection and control of the traditional risk
factors for stroke and cardiovascular disease may be effective in the
prevention of VCI, even in older people. Vascular contributions to cognitive impairment and dementia are
important. Understanding of VCI has evolved substantially in recent years,
based on preclinical, neuropathologic, neuroimaging, physiological, and
epidemiological studies. Transdisciplinary, translational, and transactional
approaches are recommended to further our understanding of this entity and
to better characterize its neuropsychological profile. There is a need for
prospective, quantitative, clinical-pathological-neuroimaging studies to
improve knowledge of the pathological basis of neuroimaging change and the
complex interplay between vascular and Alzheimer disease pathologies in the
evolution of clinical VCI and Alzheimer disease. Long-term vascular risk
marker interventional studies beginning as early as midlife may be required
to prevent or postpone the onset of VCI and Alzheimer disease. Studies of
intensive reduction of vascular risk factors in high-risk groups are another
important avenue of research.

## 1. Introduction
As people live longer, the burden of cognitive impairment in society becomes
increasingly important. Although Alzheimer disease is the most commonly diagnosed
cause of cognitive dysfunction among the aged, cognitive impairment caused by
vascular disease, including subclinical brain injury, silent brain infarction (SBI),
and clinically overt stroke are important as independent causes and contributors to
cognitive dysfunction. There are challenges in interpreting the literature because
of nosology, criteria, and measurement issues, but the construct of vascular
contributions to cognitive impairment and dementia is sufficiently important to
merit a detailed review.

Our purpose in this scientific statement is to provide an overview of the
evidence on vascular contributions to cognitive impairment and dementia. This
statement also serves as an overall guide for practitioners to gain a better
understanding of vascular cognitive impairment (VCI) and dementia, prevention, and
treatment. Writing group members were nominated by the writing group cochairs on the
basis of their previous work in relevant topic areas and were approved by the
American Heart Association (AHA) Stroke Council Scientific Statement Oversight
Committee, the Council on Epidemiology and Prevention, and the Manuscript Oversight
Committee. The writing group used systematic literature reviews (primarily covering
publications from 1990 to May 1, 2010), previously published guidelines, personal
files, and expert opinion to summarize existing evidence, indicate gaps in current
knowledge, and, when appropriate, formulate recommendations using standard AHA
criteria ( Table 1 ). All members of the
writing group had the opportunity to comment on the recommendations and approved the
final version of this document. The document also underwent extensive internal peer
review by the AHA, as well as review by the Stroke Council leadership, Council on
Epidemiology and Prevention Council, and Scientific Statements Oversight Committee,
before receiving consideration and approval from the AHA Science Advisory and
Coordinating Committee.

In addition, for the clinical trials section, the writing group searched for
the key words vascular cognitive functioning , impairment , and dementia in the Cochrane
Reviews of Clinical Trials, Cumulative Index to Nursing and Allied Health
Literature, AMED Virtual Library, PubMed, and Medline. Subject headings were
combined with treatment, including specific therapies. Past guidelines and previous
consensus conference proceedings were reviewed, and a search for evidence for
nonpharmacological cognitive-enhancing remedies was conducted on the National
Institutes of Health National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine Web
site and the American College of Physi cians PIER (Physician's Information and
Education Resource) and Elsevier MD Consult databases.

Some of the literature review was based on the expert panel's knowledge of
the field and therefore may be subject to bias. Formal search strategies, however,
were used as indicated for evaluation of clinical trial information.

The overall prevalence of dementia in affluent countries is 5% to 10% in
people ≥65 years of age. The prevalence of Alzheimer disease doubles every
4.3 years, whereas the prevalence of vascular dementia (VaD) doubles every 5.3
years. 1 VCI is also
strongly age related. 2 A recent
report from Alzheimer's Disease International indicates that in low- to
middle-income countries, the prevalence of dementia is lower in less affluent
countries but is still very strongly related to age. 3 Incidence rates are also quite variable and are age
related. Age-adjusted rates for Alzheimer disease and VaD are 19.2 and 14.6,
respectively, per 1000 person-years. 4

A significant factor in interpreting the prevalence and incidence figures
from Alzheimer disease and VaD pertains to the issue of diagnostic thresholds. Most
older studies use the construct of VaD or multi-infarct dementia (MID) in estimating
figures. More recently, the construct of VCI has been introduced to capture the
entire spectrum of cognitive disorders ranging from mild cognitive impairment to
fully developed dementia. 5 As the
threshold is expanded, the frequency rates increase accordingly. Growing awareness
of the resultant societal burden underlines the need to identify, prevent, and treat
overt and covert cerebral vascular brain injury as early as possible. 6 The term VCI was
proposed to embrace the spectrum of severity from prodrome (vascular cognitive
impairment, no dementia [VCIND]) to full-blown manifestations of cognitive
impairment, VaD, and the pathological spectrum from “pure” Alzheimer
disease through degrees of vascular comorbidity, so-called mixed disease, to
“pure” VaD. 7 Importantly, consensus-based recommendations for standardized imaging, cognitive,
and pathological protocols have been developed. 5 , 8

In addition to the threshold issue, multiple sets of criteria exist for the
constructs of VCI and VaD. 9 For
example, the more liberal criteria for VaD proposed by Hachinski et al result in
large numbers, whereas the more conservative criteria such as those of the National
Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke–Association Internationale
pour la Recherché et l'Enseignement en Neurosciences (NINDS-AIREN) yield more
modest rates. 10 , 11 An additional factor affecting the estimates of
frequency pertains to the role of neuroimaging. Many recent proposals for criteria
incorporate neuroimaging as a factor, and this can have a significant influence on
frequency figures. A further complicating issue involves the role of combinations of
various underlying pathophysiologies. Some studies contend that mixed pathologies,
including the degenerative components caused by Alzheimer disease and vascular
factors, are the most common explanation for cognitive impairment in
aging. 12 , 13

Newly proposed criteria for the fifth edition of the Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders ( www.dsm5.org ) may use another term
closely aligned with dementia, such as major neurocognitive
disorder . T he predementia symptomatic stage similar to
mild cognitive impairment may be termed mild neurocognitive
disorder . Memory loss is still a prominent feature of the syndromes in
the Alzheimer disease spectrum but is not required for the mild and major diagnoses,
because impairment in any cognitive domain, including executive function, is
sufficient. Use by clinicians and overall impact, however, remain to be seen.

Meanwhile, population magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies have revealed
the high prevalence of covert small-vessel disease in the elderly population (23%
for silent lacunes 14 and 95% for
incidental hyperintensities 15 )
associated with increased risk for stroke and dementia. Population-autopsy series
verified the high frequency and pathogenetic importance of combined Alzheimer
disease and vascular disease in the expression of dementia as mentioned
previously. 16 , 17

From the pathological perspective, there is dispute about the role of
various types of vascular lesions that contribute to cognitive impairment, including
those of the formerly used term MID , large cortical infarcts,
lacunar infarcts, subcortical white matter disease, strategically placed subcortical
infarcts, or a combination of these. Furthermore, vascular lesions can lower the
threshold for the clinical manifestation of Alzheimer disease. 16 , 18 Finally, there is pathological and clinical evidence for
cholinergic compromise in both Alzheimer disease and VCI, and cholinesterase
inhibitors have been tested for both disorders in clinical trials.

The overall situation is complex yet vitally important if we are to
understand, diagnose, and ultimately prevent and treat cognitive impairment caused
by vascular disease. The present statement covers the current state of the field
with respect to the definitions of Alzheimer disease and VCI, the basic
pathophysiological underlying nature of VCI, challenges in defining vascular effects
neuropathologically, and the role of neuroimaging in defining clinical presentation
and course. In addition, midlife and late-life risk factors are discussed and
clinical trials reviewed. Finally, recommendations for the prevention and treatment
of VCI are made and directions for the future described.

In this statement, we favor the use of the term VCI as
defined below to represent the spectrum of cognitive impairment associated with
frank stroke, vascular brain injury, or subclinical disease ranging from the least
severe to the most severe clinical manifestations. The latter end of the cognitive
severity spectrum of VCI has been referred to traditionally as VaD. The reader must keep in mind, however, that the definition of cognitive impairment
associated with stroke or vascular brain disease has changed over time, and within
individual sections of this statement, terms such as VaD, MID, poststroke
dementia , or others may be used in accordance with the original source
citations used to discuss key points in relation to the disorder.

## 2. Defining Alzheimer Disease and VCI
There has been significant evolution of the terminology to characterize
the cognitive syndrome associated with risk factors for cerebrovascular disease
and its manifestations, especially the description of dementia. Approximately 30
years ago, the term MID 11 was used to identify patients who developed dementia
after multiple strokes, although it was also used for patients with a single
vascular insult. More recently, the term VaD has been used,
regardless of the pathogenesis of the vascular lesion—ischemic or
hemorrhagic or single or multiple infarct(s). 10 , 19 , 20

Cerebrovascular disease can also cause mild cognitive deficits that can
affect multiple cognitive functions, and some authors have proposed the term vascular mild cognitive impairment ( VaMCI ). 21 , 22 This is the
“vascular” equivalent of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) commonly
used to identify subjects in the transition from normalcy to Alzheimer
disease. 23 By
extension, VCI encompasses all the cognitive disorders associated with
cerebrovascular disease, from frank dementia to mild cognitive deficits. Simply
put, VCI is a syndrome with evidence of clinical stroke or subclinical vascular
brain injury and cognitive impairment affecting at least 1 cognitive domain. The
most severe form of VCI is VaD.

The diagnostic criteria for VaD have been particularly important not
only as diagnostic tools in clinical practice but also to establish prevalence
and incidence in population studies, determine risk factors, and recruit
homogenous cohorts for drug trials. The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders 24 and the
International Classification of Diseases 25 provide criteria used for administrative purposes and
tracking disease. In some cases there is low accuracy when these criteria are
adopted as diagnostic criteria. The NINDS–AIREN 10 and State of California Alzheimer's Disease
Diagnostic and Treatment Centers 19 criteria for VaD are used in research as diagnostic
instruments that operationalize specific signs and symptoms of the VaD syndrome.
More recently, clinical criteria have been proposed to capture subcortical VaD
syndromes. 20

To date, all diagnostic criteria to characterize cognitive syndromes
associated with vascular disease should be based on 2 factors:
demonstration of the presence of a cognitive disorder (dementia or VaMCI) by
neuropsychological testing and history of clinical stroke or
presence of vascular disease by neuroimaging that suggests a link between the
cognitive disorder and vascular disease. There is substantial variability in the
approach to these 2 core issues, however. We provide a practical approach to the
classification of dementia and VaMCI ( Table
2 ) and propose that the term VCI be used for all
forms of cognitive disorder associated with cerebrovascular disease, regardless
of the pathogenesis (eg, cardioembolic, atherosclerotic, ischemic, hemorrhagic,
or genetic).

All of the major criteria for VaD have a different definition of
dementia, and this results in challenges in reliability studies. 26 Dementia criteria based on
memory deficits are derived from concepts proposed for Alzheimer disease, but
these may not be suitable for the dementia syndrome associated with
cerebrovascular disease, in which memory-related structures (eg, mesial temporal
lobe, thalamus) could be intact, resulting in relatively preserved memory
functions. 27 , 28 Thus, a memory deficit should
not be required for the diagnosis of VCI or VaD. 29

The second critical clinical feature of VaD is determining the
relationship of cerebrovascular disease to the cognitive symptoms. To
appropriately diagnose VaD, it is critical to identify the presence of cortical
or subcortical infarcts or other stroke lesions with neuroimaging, and these
should be associated with clinical symptomatology. It may also be important to
consider the source of the cardiac or vascular pathology that underlies the
cerebrovascular disease associated with VCI to provide more specific
clinicopathologic relationships. Although some authors propose that the symptoms
should appear within 3 months after a stroke, 30 this is arbitrary, and symptoms may develop
after this time frame. In addition, there are patients who have not had a
clinical stroke, and severe cerebrovascular disease is evident only in
neuroradiological studies. 31 , 32 Finally, the presence of white
matter lesions (WMLs) or leukoaraiosis (rarefaction of the white matter thought
to be secondary to small-vessel occlusive disease) is critical for the diagnosis
of cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and
leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL), 33 a genetic form of VaD in relatively young people. However,
WMLs also occur in older subjects and patients with Alzheimer disease in
epidemiological studies. 34 Therefore, although the presence of WMLs has less diagnostic value in the
elderly, WMLs could be the only neuroimaging finding in younger people with
cognitive deficits secondary to cerebrovascular disease. For example, WMLs with
or without infarcts are associated with cognitive deficits and neuropsychiatric
disorders in patients with autoimmune disorders (eg, systemic lupus
erythematosus, Sjögren disease). 35 , 36

VaD can coexist with multiple cerebral and systemic disorders that can
affect cognition in the elderly, especially Alzheimer disease. Therefore, it is
often difficult to determine whether the cognitive deterioration is solely a
consequence of vascular factors or underlying Alzheimer disease. 37 Several studies have found
that in patients with Alzheimer disease and cerebrovascular disease, less
Alzheimer disease pathology is needed to express the dementia
syndrome. 16 , 18 This synergistic effect
between Alzheimer disease and cerebrovascular disease pathology may explain why
patients with mesial temporal lobe atrophy, presumably attributable to Alzheimer
disease, have an increased risk of dementia after stroke compared with those
without atrophy, because hippocampal atrophy may also be caused by vascular
disease. 38 , 39 This is the most difficult
aspect of the clinical characterization of VaD, because the Alzheimer disease
clinical syndrome can begin after a stroke, or patients with Alzheimer disease
symptomatology can have strokes during the course of the disease. The present
statement proposes to use the term probable to characterize the
most “pure” forms of VaD and the term possible when the certainty of the diagnosis is diminished or the vascular syndrome is
associated with another disease process that can cause cognitive deficits.
Future studies using specific ligands for amyloid may help clarify the dynamic
relationship between Alzheimer disease and VaD.

We now shift our focus from VaD to less severe forms of VCI.

The term amnestic MCI has been used to identify people
at risk for Alzheimer disease. Although initially the term MCI applied solely to amnestic forms of the syndrome, 23 further studies found that these subjects had
deficits in multiple cognitive domains. 40 , 41 Therefore,
the current nomenclature for MCI is much broader and includes amnestic MCI,
amnestic MCI plus other cognitive deficit, nonamnestic single domain, and
nonamnestic multiple domains. 42 Because epidemiological studies detected executive deficits
in subjects with subcortical vascular pathology, 43 it was recommended that VaMCI should be
characterized by deficits in executive functions as memory could be
normal. 21 However,
clinical studies have shown that subjects with VaMCI can present with a broader
cognitive impairment, which can also include memory deficits. 22 These definitions are
primarily applied in research studies but may provide an initial useful platform
for classifying patients in practice.

Several studies have shown that patients with MCI can return to normal
cognition. These people have multiple disease processes that may improve with or
without specific treatments, such as depression, heart failure, or autoimmune
disorders. 44 – 46

Cerebrovascular disease with or without clinical strokes can be
associated with depression. 47 , 48 This raises an important issue
for VaMCI, because these behaviors (depression or depressive symptoms) can
severely influence patients’ activities of daily living and cognitive
performance, although some symptoms can revert with treatment (eg, depression),
and consequently cognition can improve. This means that there may be a
“reversibility” component in VaMCI. 47 , 48 An
added component of VaMCI is poststroke recovery. Patients who are seen soon
after stroke may show cognitive impairment. In some of these patients, cognition
may improve as part of the stroke recovery process.

The 2006 NINDS–Canadian Stroke Council VCI harmonization
standards suggested different neuropsychological protocols for use in patients
with suspected VCI. 5 Detailed
discussion of these protocols is beyond the scope of this statement, and the
reader is referred to the source reference by Hachinski et al 5 for suggestions for cognitive
batteries that may be applied in practice.

The neuropsychological assessment of patients with suspected VCI
requires a comprehensive cognitive battery. Executive function has long been
considered a salient feature of the disorder and should be included in the
neuropsychological battery. 21 Operational definitions of cognitive impairment (eg, performance 1 or 1.5
standard deviations below that of an appropriate comparison group) are preferred
over qualitative descriptions of cognitive symptoms.

Attempts to use neuropsychological assessment to differentiate Alzheimer
disease from VCI have met with mixed success. Executive dysfunction has not been
shown to specifically point to cerebrovascular disease, whereas a pattern of
memory deficits may be associated more with Alzheimer disease and its associated
pathology than with cerebrovascular disease. 49 , 50 This research
area is complicated by the difficulty of clinically differentiating Alzheimer
disease or VCI from mixed (Alzheimer disease plus cerebrovascular disease)
disease, which may be more common than either “pure” Alzheimer
disease or “pure” VCI. 9 In addition, the heterogeneity of cerebrovascular disease
(eg, strokes that differ in location, size, and number) works against a single,
unifying neurocognitive pattern of deficits in VCI.

Traditionally, terms such as MID or VaD have been used in the classification of cognitive
impairment associated with stroke. With newer research classification systems,
the term VCI is now preferred. VCI represents a syndrome taking
into account the spectrum of cognitive severity, which often includes executive
dysfunction and the various types of brain vascular disease that could underlie
cognitive symptoms, including subclinical vascular brain injury. The most severe
form of VCI is VaD, and new subtypes with milder cognitive symptoms (eg, VaMCI)
are being defined. The use of the VCI classification system may prove to be
useful for clinicians in practice as they consider pathogenesis and ultimately
prevention and treatment of the patient with cognitive impairment. A key to
defining the spectrum of VCI is neuropsychological testing, bedside or office
clinical examination, and neuroimaging ( Table
2 ).

## 3. Neuropathological Aspects
For decades it has been recognized that cerebrovascular disease is
associated with dementia, 11 , 51 yet defining the pathology
underlying VCI has remained elusive. 2 , 5 , 52 There are many complexities. For instance,
infarcts vary in size, number, and location; occur commonly in older people with and
without dementia 13 , 39 , 53 – 56 ; often are not associated with
clinical stroke 2 , 39 , 51 , 53 ; and typically are accompanied by
Alzheimer disease and other pathologies. 12 , 13 , 16 , 17 , 54 – 57 Many of these obstacles can be navigated by studying people
with and without dementia from community-based cohort studies, with clinical data
proximate to death, and quantitative measurements of vascular and Alzheimer disease
pathologies. Such studies 12 , 13 , 16 , 17 , 39 , 53 – 57 are accumulating and provide new
insights into the pathological substrates of VCI and dementia and the importance of
vascular pathology or brain injury.

The most important cerebrovascular pathology that contributes to
cognitive impairment is cerebral infarcts. Cerebral infarcts are discrete
regions of tissue loss observed by the naked eye (macroscopic) or under the
microscope (microscopic). Clinical-pathological studies typically focus on
chronic (old) infarcts because cognitive evaluations are often performed months
before death; the trajectory of cognitive impairment from a recent infarct may
be difficult to ascertain; and recent infarcts may be related to perimortem
factors. Chronic macroscopic infarcts are very common, occurring in
approximately one third to one half of older people, 13 , 54 – 56 a
frequency far greater than the frequency of clinical stroke. In some
community-based studies, microscopic infarcts are more common than macroscopic
infarcts. 13 , 56 In 1 study, 55 the inclusion of other
measures of vascular pathology such as microscopic infarcts, small-vessel
disease, and white matter changes increased the frequency of cerebrovascular
disease in older people to >75%.

In clinical-pathological studies, larger volumes 39 , 51 and an increased number 11 , 13 , 39 , 55 , 56 of
macroscopic infarcts are as sociated with an increased likelihood of dementia.
However, determining the volume or number necessary for VCI or dementia has
proved difficult, and unlike with Alzheimer disease and other neurodegenerative
diseases, there are no currently accepted neuropathological criteria to confirm
a clinical diagnosis of VCI. Indeed, although Tomlinson et al described 100 mL
of tissue loss as sufficient for dementia, those with lesser volumes of loss
also had dementia. 51 Studies
have generally shown an inconsistent relation between volume and number of
infarcts and cognitive impairment. 13 , 58 Some of these
inconsistencies may relate to infarct location. Regions such as the thalamus,
angular gyrus, and basal ganglia may be more likely than other regions to result
in cognitive impairment. 2 , 58 , 59 However, regional factors have not been clearly
defined, and diverse cortical 13 , 39 , 56 and subcortical 13 , 16 , 58 , 59 regional infarcts have been
related to dementia.

Further challenging these relationships, some studies suggest that
multiple microscopic infarcts are related to dementia, even after accounting for
macroscopic infarcts. 13 , 56 Multiple microscopic infarcts
may denote a more generalized phenomenon such as diffuse hypoxia, inflammation,
oxidative stress, or disruption in the blood-brain barrier (BBB). Other factors
governing whether infarcts are related to impairment may include variance in
cognitive reserve 60 and
coexisting pathologies.

Infarcts frequently coexist with Alzheimer disease pathology in the
brains of older people. 12 , 13 , 16 , 17 , 54 – 57 In addition, most people with
dementia 12 and almost
half of those with clinically probable Alzheimer disease 61 have mixed pathology, most
commonly Alzheimer disease and infarcts. Although there are no pathological
criteria to confirm mixed dementia, studies show that infarcts in a brain with
Alzheimer disease pathology are not innocuous. One study showed that only people
with Alzheimer disease pathology with subcortical infarcts had dementia, raising
the possibility of an interaction (a multiplicative effect) between the 2
pathologies. 16 Although the specific importance of subcortical infarcts and interaction has not
been confirmed, subsequent studies have established that infarcts are additive
with Alzheimer disease pathology in lowering cognitive function 17 , 57 and increasing the odds of dementia 17 , 18 , 62 , 63 or clinical Alzheimer
disease. 61 Moreover,
disturbances of episodic memory, considered the hallmark of Alzheimer disease,
are associated with infarcts even after accounting for Alzheimer disease
pathology. 17 , 59

There are multiple implications. First, because they are often
clinically unrecognized, the public health importance of infarcts and their role
in dementia is likely underestimated. Second, risk factors for infarcts may be
erroneously linked to the episodic memory and classic phenotype of clinical
Alzheimer disease. Third, prevention and therapies that decrease cerebral
infarcts are likely to lower the prevalence of clinically diagnosed
dementia.

Few studies have examined the pathological basis of MCI. 53 , 61 , 64 – 69 Alzheimer disease has been
found to be the most common pathology, 61 , 65 , 66 , 69 but mixed pathologies are also common. 61 , 65 – 69 In 1
study the frequency of pure infarct and mixed Alzheimer disease and infarct
pathology was comparable to the frequency of pure Alzheimer disease pathology in
both amnestic and nonamnestic MCI. 61 Thus, assuming the underlying neuropathological substrate
of amnestic MCI is pure Alzheimer disease pathology rather than vascular or
mixed pathology, the role of vascular pathology may be underestimated.

There are other common vascular pathologies in the brains of older
people, including white matter degeneration 70 , 71 and primary
vessel disease (ie, arteriolosclerosis/lipohyalinosis, atherosclerosis, and
cerebral amyloid angiopathy [CAA]). 70 , 72 , 73 Cerebral microbleeds,
visualized by new imaging techniques, also appear to be a common vascular
abnormality. 74 – 77 White matter degeneration and
microbleeds most likely reflect direct tissue damage, 71 , 78 – 80 whereas primary vessel disease may be associated with focal (eg, infarct) or
diffuse tissue damage (eg, white matter degeneration) or may result in
nonmorphologic functional changes. Although neuroimaging studies 70 , 76 , 77 , 81 suggest a role for white
matter degeneration and microbleeds in cognitive impairment, it is currently
unclear whether these additional pathologies represent separate pathological
substrates for VCI. In some studies, neuropathological measurements of WMLs have
not been clearly associated with cognitive function unless as part of a combined
vascular score that also includes infarcts. 52 Quantitative studies of multiple vascular pathologies
in older people with and without dementia with clinical evaluation proximate to
death are needed to determine the separate roles of these vascular pathologies
in VCI and other dementias.

Neuroimaging studies provide an excellent tool for identifying many
types of vascular pathologies in older people through accurate determination of
brain anatomy by high-resolution T1 but also tissue changes that can be
quantified by fluid-attenuated inversion recovery, diffusion tensor,
magnetization transfer, and even neurochemical changes with hydrogen
spectroscopy. However, postmortem evaluations continue to complement
neuroimaging studies in several important ways. First, neuroimaging detects
macroscopic infarcts, ≈3 mm or more in size, but microscopic infarcts and
small-vessel disease (eg, arteriolosclerosis) are currently not within the
resolution of most scans. Second, some vascular pathologies may represent either
vascular or degenerative processes. For instance, neuroimaging studies have
shown that white matter degeneration, as measured by both fluid-attenuated
inversion recovery and diffusion tensor imaging, and microbleeds are associated
with both VCI and clinical Alzheimer disease, 70 , 72 , 76 , 77 , 81 and
pathological studies demonstrate white matter degeneration and microbleeds are
related to lipohyalinosis. 58 , 70 , 79 , 80 In addition,
though, white matter degeneration is related to Alzheimer disease
pathology 78 and
microbleeds to CAA. Hippocampal volume visualized on antemortem neuroimaging may
also be related to either Alzheimer disease or vascular pathology, 82 and pathological studies show
that the hippocampus can atrophy as part of both degenerative or vascular
processes. 83 Thus,
white matter degeneration and microbleeds on MRI often considered specific for
vascular disease may signify degenerative pathology, although recent
pathological studies show no relationship between WMLs as measured by MRI and
Alzheimer disease neuropathology, 82 whereas hippocampal volume loss, often considered a
specific biomarker for early Alzheimer disease, 84 may reflect vascular pathology. These data
emphasize the need for prospective quantitative
clinical-pathological-neuroimaging studies to fully understand the pathological
bases of neuroimaging change. Furthermore, they highlight the complex interplay
between vascular and Alzheimer disease pathologies in the evolution of VCI,
dementia, and clinical Alzheimer disease.

The interplay between macroscopic and microscopic infarcts and other
vascular and degenerative pathologies in the development of clinical Alzheimer
disease and VCI is complex. Vascular and degenerative pathologies are 2 common
disorders in later life and often coexist, and each separately adds to the
likelihood of cognitive impairment and dementia. In addition, vascular and
degenerative pathologies may result in overlapping clinical and imaging
phenotypes. Longitudinal clinical-pathological-neuroimaging studies hold promise
to help us better understand the pathophysiology and phenotypes of these common
disorders of cognition in later life, which may lead to improved prevention and
treatment strategies.

## 4. Basic Science Aspects: Importance of the Neurovascular Unit and Cerebral Blood
Flow
Neurons, glia, and perivascular and vascular cells, collectively termed the neurovascular unit , are structurally, functionally, and
developmentally interrelated and work in concert to maintain the homeostasis of the
cerebral microenvironment. 85 Alterations in neurovascular function are involved in the pathogenesis of VCI.

The brain depends on a continuous blood supply, and interruption of
cerebral blood flow (CBF) leads to brain dysfunction and death. 86 Consequently, sophisticated
cerebrovascular control mechanisms ensure that the brain's blood supply is well
matched to its energy requirements. 87 Thus, neural activity induces a powerful increase in
CBF (functional hyperemia) that is thought to deliver energy substrates and
remove toxic byproducts of brain activity. 88

Cerebrovascular autoregulation keeps CBF relatively constant within a
range of blood pressures, protecting the brain from unwanted swings in perfusion
pressure. 89 Specialized receptors on endothelial cells transduce mechanical (shear stress)
and chemical stimuli and release potent signaling molecules such as nitric
oxide, endothelin, and prostanoids. 90 These endothelial mediators subserve functions as
varied as local flow distribution, 91 immune surveillance (in concert with perivascular
cells), 92 and
hemostatic balance. 93

The tight junctions between cerebral endothelial cells, coupled with
highly specialized membrane transporters, regulate the trafficking of molecules
between blood and brain, which is at the basis of the BBB. 94 Conversely, transporters on
the abluminal side of the vessels remove metabolic byproducts from the brain,
including amyloid beta (A β ). 95 Endothelial cells exert trophic actions that
are critical in brain development, neuroplasticity, and repair when endothelial
growth factors orchestrate the migration and differentiation of
neuroblasts. 96 – 99

The neurovascular unit is profoundly disrupted in VCI and Alzheimer
disease. 95 , 100 – 103 The present section will focus on the
microvascular changes associated with cerebrovascular disease and
neurodegeneration. The alterations that occur in the structure and function of
large cerebral arteries are discussed elsewhere in this statement. VCI and
Alzheimer disease are associated with marked alterations in cerebral
microvascular structure. 104 , 105 Microvessels have thickened
basement membranes, become tortuous, and are reduced in number. 71 , 105 – 107 Arterioles exhibit signs of “onion skin”–type changes and
undergo hyaline degeneration (lipohyalinosis), a cause of
microhemorrhages. 105 In the vulnerable periventricular white matter, reactive astrocytosis and
microglial activation are associated with expression of hypoxia-inducible genes,
suggesting local hypoxia. 71 , 108

As examined in the next section, in Alzheimer disease and CAA,
accumulation of A β in the media of cortical arterioles
weakens the vessel wall and increases the chance of lobar hemorrhages. 109 In animal models, the major
risk factors for VCI and Alzheimer disease —hypertension, aging, and
diabetes 110 —impair endothelium-dependent responses in the cerebral
microcirculation and blunt functional hyper-emia. 101 , 111 , 112 A β is a potent vasoconstrictor 113 , 114 and
suppresses endothelium-dependent responses, functional hyperemia, and
cerebrovascular autoregulation. 115 – 117 Cerebral smooth muscle cells of patients with Alzheimer disease have increased
constrictor tone, 118 which
may contribute to the CBF reduction observed in this condition. 100

Vascular oxidative stress and inflammation are key pathogenic factors in
neurovascular dysfunction. 101 , 119 – 121 Experimental studies suggest that radicals
produced by the enzyme nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate oxidase are
responsible for the cerebrovascular alterations induced by VCI risk factors and
A β . 112 , 122 – 124 Although free radicals can
induce inflammation by activating redox-sensitive proinflammatory transcription
factors, the endothelial dysfunction induced by oxidative stress can release
vascular endothelial growth factor and prostanoids, which promote vascular
leakage, protein extravasation, and cytokine production. 125 Inflammation, in turn,
enhances oxidative stress by upregulating the expression of reactive oxygen
species–producing enzymes and downregulating antioxidant
defenses. 126

White matter BBB alterations are early findings in VCI. 127 In models of autoimmune
white matter injury, extravasation of plasma protein triggers vascular
inflammation and axonal demyelination, 127 which in turn disrupts saltatory conduction, 128 slowing the transmission of
nerve impulses. In addition, loss of energy-saving saltatory conduction
increases metabolic demands and enhances local energy deficit and
hypoxia. 128 A similar
process may contribute to the WMLs observed in Alzheimer disease and VCI, which
play a prominent role in the expression of dementia. 110

In addition, the low-density lipoprotein receptor–related
protein-1, a critical A β brain clearance receptor, is
downregulated in cerebral blood vessels of patients with Alzheimer disease,
leading to accumulation of amyloid around blood vessels and worsening of
vascular dysfunction. 129 Plasma A β , which is elevated in some patients with VCI
and Alzheimer disease, induces cerebrovascular insufficiency and could play a
role in the white matter alterations observed in both conditions. 130 , 131 Vascular oxidative stress and inflammation impede the
proliferation, migration, and differentiation of oligodendrocyte progenitor
cells and compromise repair of the damaged white matter. 108 , 132 , 133 Furthermore, loss of growth factors, such as the brain-derived neurotrophic
factor, 96 may
contribute to the brain atrophy associated with Alzheimer disease and
VCI. 134 , 135

Although there are relatively few animal models of cognitive impairment
and white matter damage, models recapitulating features of CAA, CADASIL,
cerebral hypoperfusion, and hypertensive vasculopathy have been developed,
mainly in rodents. 5 However, it
has proved difficult to reproducibly induce white matter damage and behavioral
dysfunction by lowering CBF in a spatial-temporal pattern consistent with the
human disease. Furthermore, little has been learned about the effects of BBB
alterations and microvascular inflammation on the structure and function of
white matter. Rodent models, although well suited to genetic manipulations and
large-scale studies, can be problematic because of their small amount of white
matter and limited behavioral repertoire. Models in higher-order species would
be desirable because of the more complex behaviors and extensive white matter
pathology that can be explored. Studies using these models to investigate the
effects of CBF, microvascular inflammation, and BBB alterations on white matter
and behavior should be a priority for the field.

There is increasing evidence that alterations in neurovascular
function play a key role not only in the pathobiology of VCI but also in
Alzheimer disease.

The neurovascular unit is a major target of the deleterious
effects of vascular risk factors promoting VCI and Alzheimer disease and
of A β .

Neurovascular dysfunction increases the brain's susceptibility
to injury by (a) altering regulation of the cerebral blood supply, (b)
disrupting BBB function, and (c) reducing the trophic support and repair
potential of the injured brain.

Vascular oxidative stress and inflammation underlie many of
these deleterious effects and are potential therapeutic targets.

Therapies that enhance regenerative and reparative phenomena may
also be beneficial, but our understanding is still limited and requires
further inquiry. Use of viable animal models to explore the factors
linking CBF, microvascular inflammation, and BBB dysfunction to white
matter damage and behavioral deficits can provide mechanistic and
therapeutic insights, and the development of these models should be
eagerly pursued. In the absence of mechanism-based therapies to treat
vascular and neurodegenerative dementia, approaches aimed at maintaining
cerebrovascular health by controlling vascular risk factors are
anticipated to be extremely valuable.

## 5. Cerebral Amyloid Angiopathy and Hereditary Small-Vessel Syndromes
Deposition of A β peptide in the walls of
penetrating arterioles and capillaries of the leptomeninges and cortex is the
hallmark of sporadic CAA, a common pathology in the elderly. CAA appears in
≈10% to 30% of unselected brain autopsies and 80% to 100% when in the
presence of accompanying Alzheimer disease. 136 Advanced CAA can trigger a series of destructive
changes in the vessel wall, including loss of smooth muscle cells, development
of microaneurysms, and concentric splitting and fibrinoid necrosis of the vessel
wall and perivascular leakage of red blood cells. 137 – 139

Although CAA is most commonly recognized as a cause of spontaneous
intracerebral hemorrhage, there is growing evidence that it is an important
contributor to age-related cognitive impairment as well. Population-based
clinical-pathological studies have identified associations between advanced CAA
and worse cognitive performance, and these associations remain independent after
controlling for severity of Alzheimer disease pathology. 55 , 140 , 141 The
precise pathogenic mechanisms responsible for this association have not been
established. Possible explanations include radiographic lesions seen in advanced
CAA, such as microbleeds, 142 microinfarcts, 143 – 146 WMLs on computed tomography or MRI, 147 , 148 and
altered fractional anisotropy or mean diffusivity on diffusion tensor
MRI. 149 CAA can also
trigger vascular or perivascular inflammation, 150 , 151 manifesting as vasogenic edema of subcortical white matter and more rapidly
progressive cognitive decline. 152

In the absence of direct neuropathological assessment, CAA is most
commonly diagnosed by the detection of hemorrhages confined to cortical or
cortico-subcortical (“lobar”) brain regions. The presence of
multiple strictly lobar hemorrhages in the absence of other definite causes such
as head trauma, brain tumor, or supratherapeutic anticoagulation has been
defined by the Boston criteria as “probable CAA” and validated
against neuropathologically or genetically diagnosed CAA. 153 , 154 T2*-weighted gradient-echo MRI sequences provide
substantially increased sensitivity for detection of cerebral microbleeds and
are key to the diagnosis of probable CAA. Other potential diagnostic approaches
have been explored, including detection of reduced A β in
cerebrospinal fluid 155 or
increased retention of the amyloid ligand Pittsburgh Compound B on positron
emission tomography imaging. 156 , 157 Pittsburgh
Compound B retention is not specific for CAA as opposed to Alzheimer disease,
because the compound binds to both vascular and parenchymal amyloid 158 ; however, the 2 pathologies
may be distinguishable in part by the relative occipital predominance of
labeling in CAA. 156 , 157

No treatments have been identified to successfully prevent or slow
cognitive impairment caused by noninflammatory CAA. A recent study found an
association between coincident hypertension and larger volumes of WMLs in
patients with CAA, 159 raising
the intriguing (but unproven) possibility that blood pressure control may be
beneficial. For the subset of patients with CAA-related inflammation, treatment
with a course of high-dose corticosteroids or cyclophosphamide has been reported
to cause clinical and radiological improvement. 152

Beyond the effects of A β deposits in CAA,
soluble A β itself may also trigger altered vascular
reactivity and brain injury. As discussed in the previous section, evidence for
this possibility comes from animal models in which exogenously applied or
genetically overexpressed A β production diminished
vasodilation to pharmacological or physiological stimuli, even in the absence of
vascular A β deposits. 115 , 160 , 161 Because
A β concentration may be manipulated via
direct 160 or
indirect 162 metabolic
pathways, these experiments raise the intriguing possibility that
A β -induced vascular dysfunction might prove
treatable. This possibility, however, has not been tested in human studies.

The most commonly encountered hereditary cause of VCI is CADASIL. This
disorder can present clinically as migraines with aura, mood disturbances,
recurrent strokes, or cognitive impairment 163 and radiographically by the appearance of extensive
WMLs, lacunar infarcts, microbleeds, and brain atrophy. 164 Nearly all cases of CADASIL
are caused by missense mutations of the Notch3 gene that either
create or eliminate cysteine residues. 165 Identification of such mutations, which can also occur
de novo in sporadic cases of CADASIL, 166 , 167 has become
the primary method of diagnosis. Most CADASIL patients also appear to
demonstrate characteristic ultrastructural changes in skin and muscle vessels,
in particular the deposition of granular osmiophilic material in the arteriolar
media. 168 – 170 Although no treatments have
been identified to modify the course of CADASIL, it is notable that
cardiovascular risk factors such as hypertension, elevated hemoglobin A1c, and
smoking may be associated with a worse clinical and radiographic
phenotype. 171 , 172

Other hereditary small-vessel syndromes of the brain are rare and have
generally not been reported as causes of sporadic disease via de novo mutation.
These syndromes include familial CAA caused by mutations or duplications of the APP β -amyloid precursor protein
gene, 173 – 175 autosomal dominant retinal
vasculopathy with cerebral leukodystrophy caused by frameshift deletions in the
exonuclease TREX1 , 176 and cerebral autosomal recessive arteriopathy with
subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy caused by missense or nonsense
mutations of the transforming growth factor- β 1 repressor HTRA1 . 177 Mutations of the COL4A1 type IV collagen
subunit gene have also been reported in association with congenital
porencephaly, leukoencephalopathy, or intracerebral hemorrhage. 178 , 179 Of note, a single nucleotide polymorphism in the COL4A1 gene was associated with pulse wave velocity, an
index of arterial stiffness, in a population. 180

CAA appears to be a relatively common and important contributor to
age-related small-vessel dysfunction and VCI. Diagnostic approaches to CAA (and
to CADASIL, the most common form of hereditary small-vessel disease) have
improved, but no disease-modifying therapies have been identified. Coexisting
vascular risk factors such as hypertension, diabetes, and smoking may worsen the
effects of CAA and CADASIL and are therefore plausible targets for
treatment.

It is reasonable to use MRI with T2*-weighted gradient-echo
sequences in patients with progressive cognitive impairment for
detection of the multiple strictly lobar hemorrhagic lesions
characteristic of probable CAA (Class IIa; Level of Evidence
B).

It is reasonable to perform genetic testing for
cysteine-altering mutations in Notch3 in patients with
progressive cognitive impairment, characteristic imaging findings, and a
family history suggestive of autosomal dominant inheritance (Class IIa; Level of Evidence A).

Notch3 testing may also be considered in
sporadic patients with suggestive clinical and imaging findings,
particularly in the absence of strong cardiovascular risk factors (Class IIb; Level of Evidence B).

If genetic testing is either unavailable or demonstrates Notch3 mutations of unclear significance,
ultrastructural examination of skin or muscle biopsy specimen for
granular osmiophilic deposits may be considered as an alternative or
complementary procedure (Class IIb; Level of Evidence
B).

In suspected CAA or CADASIL, treatment of cardiovascular risk
factors is reasonable (Class IIa; Level of Evidence
C).

Patients with subacute cognitive decline and evidence of
CAA-related inflammation should be treated with a course of
immunosuppressive therapy such as corticosteroids or cyclophosphamide (Class I; Level of Evidence B).

## 6. Pathophysiology of Arterial Structure and Function
Vascular aging is well exemplified by the strong relationship between age
and changes in large-artery structure and function. 181 Several arterial parameters have been selected
for clinical investigation, based on the feasibility and repeatability of their
measurement and their predictive value of cardiovascular events. 182 They include carotid wall
thickening and aortic stiffening, which also likely reflect atherosclerosis and arteriosclerosis ,
respectively. Recently a large number of studies have reported strong relationships
between indices of vascular aging and either cognitive impairment or silent cerebral
small-vessel disease. That these relationships were independent of age and classic
cardiovascular risk factors suggests common pathophysiological mechanisms linking
large-artery damage to cerebral small-vessel disease.

Although a number of disease states can lead to vessel wall
thickening, 143 cyclic
vessel distention in normal aging (ie, beat-to-beat change in vessel diameter in
response to the pulsatility of blood pressure) is thought to cause fragmentation
and depletion of elastin and increased collagen deposition, resulting in a
nearly 3-fold increase in intima-media thickness (IMT) between the ages of 20
and 90 years. 145 The
lumen-intima and media-adventitia separation can be determined to within
≈0.1 mm on longitudinal B-mode ultrasound images of the extracranial
carotid arteries where these interfaces are readily apparent. 183 , 184

The relationship between carotid IMT and cognitive function has been
analyzed cross-sectionally 185 , 186 and longitudinally 187 – 189 in few studies. The studies were
heterogeneous for the study population (small groups, sex composition, healthy
subjects or affected by Alzheimer-type dementia), the definition of carotid IMT
(mean of left and right common carotid artery, IMT at bifurcation, sum of IMT at
multiple carotid sites), and the neuropsychological test adopted to evaluate
cognition (single or repeated measures of the Mini Mental State Examination
[MMSE], a neuropsychological battery with specific tests for different cognitive
domains). Despite this heterogeneity, a significant inverse relationship between
carotid IMT and cognitive function was observed in all studies. Specifically,
the thicker the artery, the lower the cognitive performance. This relationship
was significant after controlling for age and education; some studies further
adjusted for the presence of depressive symptoms 187 , 189 and/or cardiovascular risk factor level. 189

The precise causal association of carotid IMT with VCI is uncertain.
Carotid IMT can reflect either a media thickening in response to the increase in
blood pressure in hypertensive patients, an intima thickening in response to
atherosclerotic risk factors, or most often a combination of both. Nearly all
types of vascular disease that may increase IMT may also affect cognitive
function through a variety of mechanisms, directly or indirectly. Carotid
atherosclerosis and IMT have been associated with cardiovascular risk factors,
including metabolic, inflammatory, and dietary factors, that have also been
associated with cognitive decline. 189 – 192 In
addition, several studies have described associations between craniocervical
artery atherosclerosis and cognitive impairment. For instance, in participants
>90 years of age, intracranial atherosclerosis emerged as an important
predictor of dementia in subjects with low Alzheimer disease pathology
scores. 193 In an
autopsy series, the presence of large-vessel cerebrovascular disease, or
atherosclerosis, was strongly associated with an increased frequency of neuritic
plaque. 194

The mechanisms by which atherosclerotic cerebrovascular pathology might
be associated with VCI include thrombotic occlusion of large vessels with
subsequent chronic cerebral hypoperfusion; cerebral embolism originating from
ruptured or thrombotic carotid plaques and targeting distal vessels; increased
parenchymal oxidative stress; blood pressure dys-regulation affecting BBB
integrity; and a common genetic vulnerability to atherosclerosis of large and
small vessels. 189 , 195 – 198 In all likelihood, common cardiovascular
factors influence both IMT and VCI independently, but the consequences of
vascular disease may also directly affect cognitive function.

The well-known, age-related arterial stiffening process
( arteriosclerosis ) is associated with quantitatively less
elastin and more collagen but is also associated with qualitative changes in the
arterial wall. 143 , 199 , 200 The most simple, noninvasive, robust, and reproducible
method with which to determine aortic stiffness is the measurement of
carotid-femoral pulse wave velocity, using the foot-to-foot velocity method from
various waveforms (pressure, Doppler, distention). 182 The analysis of aortic pressure waveform
allows the calculation of central systolic blood pressure and pulse pressure,
which are influenced by aortic stiffness and the geometry and vasomotor tone of
small arteries. Central systolic blood pressure and pulse pressure can be
estimated noninvasively either from the radial artery waveform, using a transfer
function, or from the common carotid waveform. Both aortic pulse wave velocity
and central systolic blood pressure and pulse pressure predict cardiovascular
events independent of classic cardiovascular risk factors. 182

Carotid-femoral pulse wave velocity, the “gold standard”
for evaluating arterial stiffness, 182 was higher in any group of cognitively impaired
subjects with or without dementia. 201 An inverse relationship between pulse wave velocity
and cognitive performance was reported cross-sectionally. 186 , 202 , 203 Carotid
femoral pulse wave velocity was also associated prospectively with cognitive
decline before dementia in studies using a cognitive screening test 204 , 205 and more specifically tests of verbal learning and
delayed recall and nonverbal memory. 205 These relationships remained significant after
controlling for age, sex, education, and blood pressure levels. Other studies
reported a significant positive relationship between arterial stiffness and
volume or localization of WMLs, a known factor predisposing to
dementia, 206 on
neuroimaging. 207 , 208

Several pathways may link aortic stiffness to microvascular brain
damage. They include endothelial dysfunction and oxidative stress, 209 a mutually reinforcing
remodeling of large and small vessels (ie, large-/small-artery cross
talk), 210 and
exposure of small vessels to the high-pressure fluctuations of the cerebral
circulation, 211 which
is perfused at high-volume flow throughout systole and diastole, with very low
vascular resistance. Additionally, stiffer large arteries are associated with
increased left ventricular mass. Of note, left ventricular remodeling and
hypertrophy have been associated with higher frequency and severity of
subclinical brain damage. 212 Recently, higher left ventricular mass in older people has been independently
associated with a 2-fold higher likelihood of having dementia, independent of
blood pressure levels. 213

Direct investigation of small resistance arteries harvested from human
subcutaneous and omental fat tissue has been possible using wire or pressure
myography. 214 – 216 To the best of our
knowledge, no study has investigated the relationship between small-artery
remodeling and cognitive decline or WMLs. Noninvasive methods for measuring
small-artery remodeling have focused on retinal vessels, using either a
funduscopic methodology or scanning laser flowmetry. 217 , 218 Retinal arterial narrowing correlates with increased arterial
stiffness 219 and
cerebral small-vessel disease. 218 , 220 , 221

There is increasing recognition that small-vessel disease is a systemic
process. 222 Small-vessel disease increases with age and is accelerated by vascular risk
factors, most notably, hypertension and diabetes. 223 Putative mechanisms for this are increasing
thickening of the basement membrane of capillaries and perivascular deposition
of collagen leading to occlusion of end arterioles. 224 This manifests as systemic arteriolar
dysfunction. In addition, brain damage may arise from small-vessel endothelial
leakage. 225

The mechanistic pathways linking microvascular brain damage to carotid
IMT, aortic stiffness, and small-artery remodeling are complementary. Aortic
stiffness predicts cardiovascular events independent of carotid IMT. 226 A large-/small-artery
cross-talk has already been described in hypertensive patients. 210 These data suggest that the
noninvasive investigation of large and small arteries could demonstrate
additional and independent predictive values for VCI and dementia. In addition,
such a noninvasive investigation could help in determining the relative weight
of each arterial parameter in contribution to all types of dementia (from VaD to
Alzheimer disease) in the general population. 227 Finally, whether early vascular
aging 228 , 229 is an important contributor
to VCI and dementia and whether the latter can be prevented or delayed by
targeted therapy remain to be demonstrated.

## 7. Neuroimaging Factors That May Influence the Clinical Presentation and Course
of VCI
VCI is defined as a syndrome in which there is evidence of stroke or
subclinical vascular brain injury based on clinical or neuroradiological features
and that is linked to impairment in at least 1 cognitive domain. Although stroke is
common in the elderly, 230 asymptomatic brain infarction is even more common, 231 and the full spectrum of cerebrovascular
disease–associated brain injury (CVBI) measured on brain MRI includes WMLs,
brain atrophy, and other findings. 232 This section discusses evidence from imaging studies that
examine the influence of CVBI on cognition and cognitive decline. 10

As previously discussed, VCI may have a variety of clinical
presentations that may depend on the setting in which patients are evaluated.
For example, in community-based studies, evidence of CVBI and cognitive
impairment is often found without a history of a strokelike
event. Furthermore, the relative contributions to VCI of microbleeds seen on MRI
or microinfarcts discovered at autopsy remain uncertain, although both occur
with increased frequency among people diagnosed with dementia during
life. 77 , 233 Therefore, although the
finding of CVBI on MRI is the most sensitive, the relationship between location
and volume of infarcts and cognitive impairment is complex and the subject of
ongoing investigation.

Two issues related to the accuracy of MRI for detection of CVBI are
important for a diagnosis of VCI. First is the sensitivity and specificity for
detection of CVBI. Not all lesions attributed to CVBI on MRI are in fact caused
by vascular injury, 234 and
not all vascular lesions (eg, microinfarcts) can be detected by MRI. The second
is the ability to relate these findings to specific domains of cognitive
impairment in older people who often have coincident Alzheimer disease
pathology. A number of studies have assessed the specificity of MRI findings
through neuropathological correlations with postmortem measures of CVBI,
particularly pathological correlates of WMLs. 71 , 108 In
a study that examined the pathological correlates of in vivo MRI evidence of
CVBI, 82 WMLs were
highly correlated with pathological features of ischemic white matter injury but
not Alzheimer disease pathology. Gray matter volumes, however, were associated
with both vascular and Alzheimer disease processes, and hippocampal volumes were
associated with both hippocampal sclerosis and Alzheimer disease. It is evident
that firm conclusions about imaging of CVBI relate to lack of accurate measures
of concurrent Alzheimer disease pathology. Recent amyloid imaging techniques
have proved an association with Alzheimer disease pathology 235 and may prove useful for
evaluating the independent and combined effects of vascular and Alzheimer
disease brain injury on cognitive changes during normal aging in the future.
Fortunately, studies using both modalities are currently under way.

Although the specific independent effects of CVBI may remain somewhat
uncertain at this time, 236 general conclusions can be drawn from clinical and imaging studies of subject
groups with a high likelihood of having CVBI or conversely a low likelihood of
concomitant Alzheimer disease. The following sections review key findings of
studies of CVBI that may have an impact on the clinical presentation and course
of VCI.

Estimates of the prevalence of silent cerebral infarction on MRI in
community-based samples vary between 5.8% and 17.7%, with an average of 11%,
depending on age, ethnicity, presence of comorbidities, and imaging
techniques. 237 In the
Framingham study, for example, the prevalence of silent cerebral infarction
between the fifth and seventh decades of life is ≈10% but increases
rapidly in the eighth decade to 17% and in the ninth decade to nearly 30%. Most
have a single lesion, and the infarcts are most often located in the basal
ganglia (52%), followed by other subcortical (35%) and cortical (11%)
areas. 237 Risk
factors for silent cerebral infarction are generally the same as those for
clinical stroke. 237 , 238

WMLs are even more common and are generally present in most people
>30 years of age, 231 increasing steadily in extent with advancing age. WMLs also share risk factors
with stroke, 239 although
advancing age remains a strong effect. Importantly, age-specific definitions of
extensive WMLs can be created 240 and prove useful in defining risk for VCI in a community
cohort. 240

Numerous studies have examined the cross-sectional relationship between
MRI evidence of CVBI and cognitive ability. A recent review 232 of large epidemiological
studies summarizes cognitive and behavioral effects of both silent cerebral
infarction and WMLs on cognition. Interestingly, although most studies suggest
that these measures of CVBI are usually associated with
non–memory-related cognitive deficits, 241 a number of studies also show similar
associations with memory impairment. 240 , 242 , 243 These data are consistent
with recent pathological findings of an association between infarctions found at
autopsy and episodic memory performance. 12 , 59 Incident
cognitive impairment also occurs in association with CVBI. For example, the
presence of SBI more than doubles the risk of dementia and risk of
stroke. 240 , 244 , 245 Similarly, WMLs have been associated with declining
scores in the modified MMSE and the Digit Symbol Substitution Test, 246 , 247 as well as with incident MCI, dementia, and
death. 240 Recent
evidence also suggests that progression of WMLs is a better predictor of
persistent cognitive impairment than baseline WML burden, 248 although there is a strong
association between baseline WML volume and increase in WML volume. 249

Among patients who have experienced a first stroke, the prevalence of
poststroke dementia (PSD) varies in relation to the interval after stroke,
definition of dementia, location and size of the infarct, and other inclusion
and exclusion criteria. In a Rochester, MN, community-based study of stroke, the
prevalence of dementia was 30% immediately after stroke, and the incidence of
new-onset dementia increased from 7% after 1 year to 48% after 25
years. 250 In general,
having a stroke increases the risk of dementia 2-fold. Risk of dementia is
higher with increased age and fewer years of education, history of diabetes
mellitus and atrial fibrillation, and recurrent stroke. 251 Patients with PSD have
degrees of functional impairment and high mortality rates. Long-term mortality
is 2 to 6 times higher in patients with PSD after adjustment for demographic
factors, associated cardiac diseases, stroke severity, and stroke recurrence
(for review, see Leys et al 252 ).

Among neuroimaging findings, silent cerebral infarcts, white matter
changes, and global and medial temporal lobe atrophy are associated with
increased risk of PSD. 252 Left hemisphere, anterior and posterior cerebral artery distribution, multiple
infarcts, and strategic infarcts have been associated with PSD in at least 2
studies. 40 On the
basis of small case studies, locations considered to be
“strategic” have traditionally included the left angular gyrus,
inferomesial temporal, mesial frontal, anterior and dorsomedial thalamus, left
capsular genu, and caudate nuclei. The concept of strategic infarction, however,
needs to be reexamined in larger prospective MRI studies, with the extent and
location of CVBI defined in relation to cognitive networks. 232

It is difficult to determine to what extent cognitive impairment may be
attributable to stroke versus concomitant Alzheimer disease. Estimates of the
proportion of patients with PSD with presumed Alzheimer disease vary widely
between 19% and 61%. 40 Approximately 15% to 30% of people with PSD have a history of dementia before
stroke, 38 , 253 and approximately one third
have significant medial temporal atrophy. 38 In the Lille study, the incidence of dementia 3 years
after stroke was significantly greater in those patients with versus those
without medial temporal atrophy (81% versus 58%). 38 It is plausible that the likelihood of
Alzheimer disease is higher among patients with cognitive impairment preceding
stroke or with medial temporal atrophy, but this remains conjectural in the
absence of neuropathological confirmation.

Cross-sectional studies of CVBI in convenience samples often find
increased evidence of both SBI and WMLs in subjects with dementia, 254 , 255 consistent with recent community-based pathological
studies. 12 Unfortunately, a clear pattern of effect of CVBI on cognition in convenience
samples is confounded by a general focus on Alzheimer disease and the exclusion
of people with coincident VCI. 232 In at least 1 study of people with subcortical vascular
brain injury presenting with memory impairment, incident lacunar infarction was
associated with subtle declines in executive function performance over
time. 256 Conversely,
measures of cerebral gray matter and hippocampal volume were both associated
with declines in memory performance. 256 Interestingly, the combined effects of CVBI and
atrophy persist even among people clinically diagnosed with VaD according to
NINDS-AIREN criteria. 257

Depression in late life may be associated with vascular
disease. 258 , 259 There may be a higher
frequency of brain white matter damage and other subcortical lesions, such as
lacunar infarcts. It is believed that the associated brain changes in this
condition are linked to atherosclerotic risk factors such as hypertension,
diabetes mellitus, and hyperlipidemia. Neuro-psychological study may show
evidence of executive dys-function and other findings. Proposed mechanisms for
vascular depression in patients with cerebrovascular diseases include but are
not limited to autonomic dysfunction, platelet activation,
hypothalamic-pituitary axis activation, endothelial dysfunction, inflammatory
mechanisms, genetic factors, and hyperhomocysteinemia. 258 Depression with a cerebrovascular basis may
respond to treatment with certain selective serotonin-reuptake inhibitors.
Depression is further discussed in the section on comorbid neuropsychiatric
disease.

The clinical presentation and course of CVBI are highly variable, with
the classic phenotype of stepwise decline in association with stroke 10 being a relatively uncommon
presentation for VCI. Structural MRI provides a fairly sensitive and specific
marker for CVBI, but the relationship between CVBI and cognitive impairment is
confounded by the frequent presence of Alzheimer disease changes of the brain
and co-occurrence of depression on a cerebrovascular basis. Recent data from
prospective population-based samples (where the likelihood of Alzheimer disease
is relatively low) clearly show that progressive SBI and WMLs are correlated
with worsening of cognitive impairment, especially executive function. Thus, SBI
and WMLs at least offer a readily available surrogate marker for the early
detection and prevention of VCI and when found in combination are likely to
indicate significant underlying CVBI. However, the utility of MRI or computed
tomography for the diagnosis of VCI is not yet clearly defined. 259a Ongoing research may
further improve MRI detection of microinfarction, and, with the use of amyloid
imaging in addition to detection of medial temporal atrophy, may further refine
the biological mechanisms whereby imaging evidence of CVBI contributes to
VCI.

The use of brain imaging with computed tomography or MRI may be
reasonable in making a diagnosis of VCI (Class IIb; Level of
Evidence B) .

## 8. Impact of Cardiovascular Risk Factors at Different Ages on the Risk of
Cognitive Decline
This section includes studies on the range of cognitive impairment,
including VaD diagnosed with internationally recognized criteria. 10 , 19 , 25 The studies
generally included tests that conformed to the NINDS-Canadian Stroke Council VCI
harmonization standards, reported at the minimum 1 nonmemory cognitive test of a
function typically affected in VCI, or included a diagnosis of VCI or VaD. Because
the present statement is focused on VCI, studies reporting only on tests of global
cognition, memory tests, total dementia, or Alzheimer disease were excluded. We
recognize that this is a somewhat arbitrary choice, because many articles and
reviews show that vascular risk factors are also importantly associated with
Alzheimer disease, mixed dementia, and amnestic MCI. 110 , 260 , 261 Furthermore, several
pathophysiological pathways leading to vascular and neurodegenerative processes are
similar. 262 Also,
neuropathic studies show a high proportion of older people have mixed pathology,
with Alzheimer disease lesions and vascular lesions being the most
prevalent. 18

For most risk factors, we drew from studies providing Class I evidence(ie,
the risk factor is reported as a major finding in a community-based study that is
preferably prospective or part of an intervention, with a sample size >500).
For specific factors, such as coronary artery bypass grafting and cardiac output, we
reviewed studies based on Class II evidence according to carefully analyzed clinical
data.

Several issues specific to studying risk factors for cognitive impairment
should be accounted for when interpreting the literature: Questionnaire data rely on the recall of subjects who by
definition of the research may be cognitively impaired. 263 Reverse causation must be considered because it is possible
that the risk factor level is a response to rather than a
“cause” of the outcome. 260 This is a particular concern in
studies that measure cognitive function in late life, shortly after or
simultaneously with the measure of a risk factor. The activity of biomarkers in the brain generally cannot be
measured directly. The cognitive tests for VCI are, to a degree, nonspecific for
vascular disease, and different criteria for VaD identify different sets
of people. 29 The brains of older people have multiple morbidities that can
lead to the same phenotype. 18

Questionnaire data rely on the recall of subjects who by
definition of the research may be cognitively impaired. 263

Reverse causation must be considered because it is possible
that the risk factor level is a response to rather than a
“cause” of the outcome. 260 This is a particular concern in
studies that measure cognitive function in late life, shortly after or
simultaneously with the measure of a risk factor.

The activity of biomarkers in the brain generally cannot be
measured directly.

The cognitive tests for VCI are, to a degree, nonspecific for
vascular disease, and different criteria for VaD identify different sets
of people. 29

The brains of older people have multiple morbidities that can
lead to the same phenotype. 18

Prevalence estimates of VaD vary widely. A recent study reporting
on the prevalence of VaD in developing countries reported a range of 0.6% to
2.1%. 3 , 33 In a pooled analysis of
major European population–based studies, VaD was prevalent in 1.6% of
subjects >65 years of age, but there was a large variation in 5-year
age-specific prevalence. 264 In general, however, after age 65 years, there is an
exponential increase in prevalence and incidence of VaD as age
increases, 265 , 266 although the trends
after 90 years of age have not been well established. 4 , 267 , 268 This
age-related increase in VaD follows the pattern of stroke, 269 although dementia after
stroke may be more frequent in people <80 years old. 270 Some studies report a
higher incidence of VaD in men than in women, 4 , 271 although a pooled analysis of incidence studies found no
difference. 272 MCI may not differ by sex, 273 but additional studies are needed to answer this
question. The incidence of VaD appears to be higher in blacks than in
whites 4 or in
Hispanics with a history of stroke, 274 possibly reflecting group differences in
cerebrovascular risk profile. Recent studies have shown that similar to
Western countries, Alzheimer disease is the leading cause of dementia in
Asian populations. 275 Until there is a harmonization of criteria and a better understanding of how
the population-level vascular burden and mortality patterns affect frequency
estimates, it will not be possible to exclude methodological differences in
case definition as a reason for differences in estimates of prevalence and
incidence of vascular-related cognitive disorders.

The apolipoprotein E ε 4 allele is
associated with increased levels of cardiovascular risk factors 276 and is a strong
indicator of genetic risk for Alzheimer disease. Despite this, several
studies report no association of the polymorphism with VaD. 34 , 277 Many more genetic candidates are expected to
emerge with the publication of results from genome-wide association
studies, 278 , 279 although the immediate
clinical relevance of these findings is unclear. An important factor
limiting the study of genetic factors of VCI is the lack of a clear
determination of the phenotype, because superimposed Alzheimer disease
processes cannot be ruled out.

As with most neurocognitive disorders of late life, VCI is likely
to be more common as age increases. There is no apparent association of
apolipoprotein E ε 4 and VCI. However, more genetic
candidates are expected to emerge as additional studies on endophenotypes of
VCI are conducted. These traits include specific cognitive domains such as
speed of processing, vascular lesions such as macrovascular infarcts
detected on MRI, and microvascular lesions detected in neuropathological
samples.

Low educational level has been reported to be associated with an
increased risk for VaD. 280 However, cognitive tests have an education component,
which may reflect years or quality of schooling, socioeconomic status,
chronic disease or less healthy lifestyle patterns, acculturation, racial
socialization, or cognitive reserve. 281 Thus, there are a number of possible explanations
or confounders in relation to education level and VCI.

The association of diet with cognitive function has a long history
grounded not only in studies of cardiovascular risk factors but also in
studies of brain development and physiology.

Antioxidants, which include vitamins E, 282 C, and beta carotene, 283 consumed either as a
part of the diet (fruits and vegetables) or as supplements, have been
reported to reduce the risk of cognitive impairment. 284 However, several
prospective 285 and interventional 286 , 287 studies show no benefit
of consuming antioxidants to preserve cognitive function or reduce
decline.

Fish oil n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids are of interest because of
their antioxidant and antiinflammatory properties and because they are major
components of membrane phospholipids in the brain and play a critical role
in neuronal function. 288 In studies of cognition, levels of n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids are
estimated by dietary intake or directly as blood markers. A 3-year
observational study of cognitive decline in elderly men reported high fish
intake to be inversely associated with cognitive impairment. 289 Some, 290 – 292 but not all, 293 studies of middle-aged and older
subjects with 5 to 6 years of follow-up suggest increasing levels of n-3
polyun-saturated fatty acids are associated with better cognitive function
and less cognitive decline.

Vitamin D is an emerging risk factor for an increased risk of
cardiovascular disease and stroke. Recently, 1 study found an association of
lower circulating vitamin D levels with poorer cognitive function, 294 but another found no
association. 295 Additional studies are needed to further understand how vitamin D levels may
be associated with cognitive function and impairment.

Folic acid and vitamins B 12 and B 6 are key
components of the pathways leading to the production and metabolism of
homocysteine. 296 Homocysteine is a risk factor for vascular damage. 296 Cross-sectional and longitudinal studies
consistently show that increasing levels of plasma homocysteine are
associated with poorer performance in global as well as multiple cognitive
domains. 297 – 299 In a randomized trial of women with cardiovascular disease or risk factors
for cardiovascular disease, 285 , 300 there
was no benefit to cognitive function from a 6-year intervention that used a
supplement with B vitamins to lower plasma homocysteine levels.

There is some evidence that a Mediterranean diet can reduce
cognitive decline. 301 However, despite the key role studies of diet have played in shaping our
understanding of cardiovascular disease, it has been much more difficult to
study the role of diet in shaping late-life trajectories of cognition.
Diet-cognition associations are difficult to interpret for the reasons
described. To advance this area of research, we need better information on
how dietary and peripheral biomarkers of nutritional status reflect brain
resources and metabolism, more valid measures of remote diet, studies of
dietary patterns, and studies of younger people.

Physical activity may increase brain neurotrophins, such as
brain-derived neurotrophic factor, improve cerebrovascular functioning and
brain perfusion, reduce response to stress, and increase brain plasticity
through synaptogenesis and neurogenesis. 302 The Chicago Health and Aging Project
(CHAP), which was based on a cohort with low physical activity, found no
association between cognitive decline and physical activity carried out in
the 2 weeks before the study examination. 303 However, long-term regular physical
activity, including vigorous activity and walking, was strongly associated
with higher levels of cognitive function, less cognitive decline, and less
VaD. 303 – 306 Physical activity or
exercise is recommended to maintain aerobic fitness and function and for its
potential cognitive benefits. 307 For those able to engage in exercise, the American
Heart Association recommends 30 minutes of exercise of moderate intensity on
most days. For those with a disability, a supervised therapeutic regimen may
be implemented. Physical activity has been identified as having potential
protective benefits in brain health and plasticity and in VCI and related
conditions. 308 – 314

There is a relative paucity of data on the type and frequency of
physical activity and what the short- and long-term benefits of physical
activity are for preservation of brain health. The Lifestyle Interventions
and Independence for Elders Study (LIFE), 314a a clinical trial testing the effects of
a 4-year exercise intervention on physical function, will measure cognitive
function as a secondary outcome; it is expected to be completed in 2013.

The risks and benefits of alcohol intake have been debated for
years, with the only clear risk for cognitive impairment being heavy alcohol
use. Comparisons of studies on cognitive dysfunction are made difficult by
the disparate definitions of alcohol intake, reference groups (ie, people
who never drink, prior drinkers who now abstain, or people who drink
infrequently compared with drinkers), and different outcome measures.
Despite this, several longitudinal studies, including those with measures of
exposure in middle age, have found some benefit in relation to cognition of
more use of alcohol compared with infrequent use or no
(“never”) use of alcohol. 315 – 317 However, studies vary in the amount of alcohol associated with a positive
effect; the relative significance of global, memory, and executive function;
and whether the effect varies by sex.

Obesity, or body fat, is an emerging risk marker of interest
because of its metabolic consequences and recent reports of associations
with total dementia. 318 Body mass index has a U-shaped relationship with total dementia and VaD, so
that subjects at the lower and upper ends of body mass index distribution
had a higher frequency of dementia relative to subjects with a normal body
mass index. 319 Body mass
index measured in midlife is more strongly associated with VCI, whereas body
weight measured later in life has an inverse association with cognitive
impairment, where obesity is associated with a lower risk of
dementia. 320 The
differences in study results may reflect the different weight trajectories
in midlife and late life relative to the age when cognition is measured or
dementia occurs. 321 In
the Framingham Offspring Study, higher waist-hip ratio was associated with
lower cognitive function, which was measured 12 years later. High waist-hip
ratio strengthened the association with hypertension and dementia in the
highest quartile of waist-hip ratio. It is unclear what confounding factors
were taken into account in these analyses. 322 A recent meta-analysis shows that high
waist-hip ratio is associated with greater risk of dementia in all
studies. 319

Smoking has well-known effects on the cardiovascular system and
neurons, which are mediated generally by oxidative stress and inflammation.
Several prospective studies show an increased risk for cognitive decline in
smokers compared with nonsmokers, 323 , 324 although risk may be specific for certain cognitive domains, 325 possibly because
nicotine may also stimulate cholinergic pathways within the brain. 326

Social networks and patient and family support have been associated
with cognitive functioning in elderly populations in longitudinal and
cross-sectional epidemiological studies. 327 – 330 However, these observations have not been tested
in randomized controlled trials, and data can only be extrapolated to
patients with VCI.

Lifestyle factors may be risk factors for VCI, and for many there
is evidence for plausible biological mechanisms by which these factors may
heighten risk of VCI. Gaps in knowledge about the role of such factors in
VCI may be bridged by additional well-designed epidemiological studies,
harmonization of how lifestyle activity is defined, and clinical trials.

In people at risk for VCI, smoking cessation is reasonable (Class IIa; Level of Evidence A).

In people at risk for VCI, the following lifestyle
interventions may be reasonable: moderation of alcohol intake (Class IIb; Level of Evidence B) ; weight
control (Class IIb; Level of Evidence B) ; and
physical activity (Class IIb; Level of Evidence
B) .

In people at risk for VCI, the use of antioxidants and B
vitamins is not beneficial, based on current evidence (Class
III; Level of Evidence A) .

Depression may impact cognitive functions and may mimic cognitive
decline. It can be considered a comorbidity, prodromal factor, or a consequence
of VCI rather than a factor that specifically alters vascular physiology or
neuronal health, leading to cognitive impairment. 47 In general, large epidemiological studies of
older people use measures of depression symptoms such as the Center for
Epidemiological Studies Depression Scale. 331 Some studies suggest symptoms of depression predict
cognitive decline. 332 – 334 However, when investigators
in the Three City Study controlled for current depressive symptoms, there was
attenuation of a significant association between 4-year cognitive decline and
history of major depression. Investigators in the Cardiovascular Health Study
(CHS) could not confirm that vascular factors mediated an association of
depressive symptoms with incident MCI. 335

Physiological factors are continuous traits that contribute to or are
biomarkers of disease processes and can be measured in a clinical examination,
with imaging, or in biological specimens.

High blood pressure has long been known to cause stroke. 336 Midlife hypertension
ranks as an important modifiable risk factor for late-life cognitive
decline, 337 mild
cognitive impairment, 338 , 339 and VaD. 340 , 341 In longitudinal cohort studies, higher
systolic blood pressure has been associated with greater late-life cognitive
decline, although some studies have reported a J- or U-shaped
relation. 342 Findings from these prospective cohort studies for diastolic blood pressure
and cognitive decline are less consistent; however, many have reported a
similar inverse relation. The data on the role of blood pressure and
hypertension in later life are not consistent, leaving open the issue of
blood pressure treatment in older people. The controversy about the
association between later life hypertension and cognitive decline arises
because the longitudinal relationship between cognitive change and blood
pressure is sensitive to the effects of age, duration of follow-up and
number of blood pressure measurements, hypertensive treatment status,
comorbidity with cardiovascular diseases and stroke, and possibly
subclinical dementia. 343

Multiple mechanisms related to diabetes-related glucose and insulin
dysregulation can lead to vascular and neuronal damage. 344 Chronic hyperglycemia,
increased insulin, the metabolic syndrome, and diabetes are associated with
VCI, 337 , 345 – 348 as well as VaD or dementia with
stroke. 349 , 350 Of note, hyperglycemia
is associated with functional changes in cerebral blood flow that are
reversible when good glycemic control is restored. 351 These findings have been reported across
multiple populations. Studies suggest that the longer the duration of
diabetes, the poorer the cognitive function. 347 , 348 , 352 It is
remarkable to consider that recurrent episodes of hypoglycemia may cause
permanent cognitive impairment in older subjects 353 and that cognitive disturbance, in turn,
represents a risk factor for hypoglycemia in older adults.

In the Finnish study Cardiovascular Risk Factors Aging and Dementia
(CAIDE), midlife measures of total cholesterol significantly predicted
cognitive impairment 21 years later, an association that was attenuated
after accounting for statin therapy. 354 In a study based on medical records, high midlife
cholesterol level increased the risk for VaD that developed over a 30-year
period. 355 Findings in late-life cohorts vary, with some finding higher levels of
cholesterol associated with a lower risk 356 and others finding a higher risk for
VaD. 357 As with
blood pressure, inconsistencies may reflect timing of the cholesterol
measurements relative to age, older people possibly being less likely to
receive lipid-lowering therapy (“generational effect”), and
clinical onset of dementia. A trial of pravastatin in older people at risk
for cardiovascular disease found no difference between the placebo and
treatment arms in multiple cognitive domains. 358

Inflammation is a key process linking many cardiovascular risk
factors to vascular and neuronal damage. Plasma levels of inflammatory
proteins, specifically α 1-antichymotrypsin and
C-reactive protein, were found to be increased before the onset of VaD over
an 8-year follow-up period 359 ; C-reactive protein levels were increased 25 years
before the onset of VaD. 360 In the Conselice Study of Brain Aging, with 4 years of
follow-up, the combination of high levels of C-reactive protein and
interleukin-6 led to a nearly 3-fold increased risk of VaD. 361

Midlife systolic and diastolic blood pressure, history of
hypertension, and total cholesterol level predict VCI. The relation of
late-life VCI to measures of blood pressure and cholesterol in later life
remains uncertain and requires further study, although higher levels of
exposure to these risk factors may prove to be beneficial. Diabetes and
hyperglycemia are associated with VCI. C-reactive protein, a marker of
inflammation, is associated with VaD.

In people at risk for VCI, treatment of hypertension is
recommended (Class I; Level of Evidence A).

In people at risk for VCI, treatment of hyperglycemia may
be reasonable (Class IIb; Level of Evidence C).

In people at risk for VCI, treatment of
hypercholesterolemia may be reasonable (Class IIb; Level of
Evidence B).

In people at risk for VCI, it is uncertain whether
treatment of inflammation will reduce such risk (Class IIb;
Level of Evidence C) .

## 9. Concomitant Clinical Vascular Disease
In the CHS and Age, Gene, Environment Susceptibility–Reykjavik
Study (AGES-RS), computed tomography–based coronary artery calcium, a
measure of severity of coronary atherosclerosis, was associated with a higher
risk of cognitive impairment. 362 , 363 Adjustment
for WMLs, SBI, cerebral microbleeds, and brain volumes attenuated the observed
association between coronary artery calcium and cognition, implicating other
vascular mechanisms. 363

Coronary artery disease has also been identified as an independent risk
factor for VaD. 34 Coronary
artery bypass graft has been associated with poorer initial cognitive function
and a higher late-life dementia risk. However, at 1- or 6-year follow-up, the
cognitive decline in these patients was no different from that observed in
controls with an equivalent burden of coronary artery disease who opted for
medical treatment or percutaneous coronary intervention. 364 , 365

The risk of new-onset dementia after a stroke is approximately twice
the rate for age- and sex-matched control subjects 270 and averages ≈10% after the first
stroke, depending on the location, volume of damaged brain tissue, 30 clinical severity, and
presence of early poststroke complications (seizure, delirium, hypoxia,
hypotension). A recent review identified older age, lower education, prestroke
cognitive impairment, diabetes, and atrial fibrillation as factors that
increased the risk, but one of the strongest predictors of cognitive decline
after an initial stroke was the occurrence of a second stroke. 269 , 270 In people with recurrent stroke, the risk of dementia
rose to ≈30%, regardless of the number and severity of vascular risk
factors they had been exposed to before the stroke. 269

Severe chronic kidney disease has been associated with metabolic
(uremic) and hypertensive encephalopathy and an increased risk of
stroke. 366 Data from
multiple studies of different populations suggest that among all people with
severe and moderate chronic kidney disease (estimated glomerular filtration rate
<30 and <60 mL/min per 1.73 m 2 , respectively), there is
a graded increase in the prevalence of cognitive impairment affecting multiple
domains. 367 , 368 In the CHS, moderate chronic
kidney disease was related to risk of incident VaD. 369 The association between chronic kidney
disease and cognitive impairment could be confounded by shared vascular risk
factors for small-vessel brain disease.

Atrial fibrillation, especially if not treated with adequate
anticoagulation, is a risk factor for stroke. 370 In several large community-based samples and
in a prospectively studied registry of people undergoing cardiac
catheterization, cross-sectionally it was an independent risk factor for lower
cognitive performance and a higher risk of VaD. 371 – 374 However, a few studies did not observe an association of
atrial fibrillation with dementia. 375 , 376 Some of
these differences could be related to age or sex (the effect was weaker in women
and older people) and the administration and effectiveness of
anticoagulation.

In the Honolulu-Asia Aging Study (HAAS) and CHS, a low ankle-brachial
index, a measure of peripheral arterial disease, was associated with an
increased risk of VaD. 377 , 378 A greater carotid-femoral
pulse wave velocity was associated with lower cognitive function in the
Maine-Syracuse Study. 379 There are scarce data relating flow-mediated endothelial dilatation (brachial
artery reactivity) with cognition.

A subclinical decrease in cardiac output has also been shown to be
associated with lower cognitive function. 380 Specifically, reduced cardiac output has been
associated with executive dysfunction (mainly sequencing and planning
difficulties) 381 and
regional WMLs adjacent to the subcortical nuclei. 382 Chronic reduced systemic perfusion may
affect cerebral perfusion homeostasis. 383 , 384 Animal and
human observations suggest that chronic hypoperfusion induces the development
and progression of WMLs. 385 – 387

Low cardiac output may represent a key factor in the onset and
progression of cognitive impairment, especially in older people with systolic
heart failure. 380 , 383

Prevention of chronic vascular diseases may help reduce the population
burden of vascular dementia. Initial and recurrent stroke significantly increase
the risk of clinical dementia. Although this is caused in part by loss of brain
tissue, it may also reflect a direct effect of vascular risk factors on both
risk of stroke and cognitive function. That is, stroke could be serving as a
marker of cumulative exposure to vascular risk factors. In an analogous manner,
disease of the coronary or peripheral arterial circulations, atrial
fibrillation, and clinically detectable renal and cardiac failure have each been
associated with cognitive impairment.

## 10. Clinical Trials in VCI and Symptomatic Treatment
Over the past decade, the role of vascular brain disease as a cause of
cognitive impairment has become increasingly evident, alone or combined with
Alzheimer disease. Pivotal trials to test drugs approved for Alzheimer disease
in patients with VaD, 388 however, have failed to achieve regulatory approval. Reasons include only modest
benefit on standard cognitive measures, which undersampled executive
functioning, and inconsistent benefits in global and daily function, which are
difficult to evaluate when physical deficits with stroke coexist. Furthermore,
high specificity but low sensitivity of VaD criteria 10 hampered recruitment, and the emphasis on
inclusion of those with memory loss made it challenging to exclude concomitant
Alzheimer disease. Finally, concern that frontline clinicians could not
distinguish VaD from Alzheimer disease made regulators reluctant to grant a
separate indication. 389

Management of vascular risks and symptomatic pharmacotherapy targeting
VaD has been the primary approach. 390 Nonpharmacological approaches have also been tried.
Standardized screening and monitoring to document baseline, disease trajectory,
and treatment response are essential. These include medical history, social and
daily functioning, cognitive screening with more detailed assessment as
appropriate, blood tests, and vascular and brain imaging. Also, factors that
exacerbate clinical disease manifestations (eg, sleep disorders, pain, stress)
must be addressed and specific efforts made to optimize quality of life of
patients and caregivers. 391

Many facets of dementia care do not involve therapies directed at
disease modification. It is important for providers to also support caregivers,
refer caregivers to educational offerings, and identify community resources,
including assistance to support performance of activities of daily living and
for living in the community, such as access to transportation and referral for
assessment of driving safety. Other areas of care are to provide advice and help
in the management of psychological symptoms and neurobehavioral complications,
preparation for loss of capacity to make financial and medical and placement
decisions, and arranging for provision of palliative care in the case of
progressive disease. A full discussion of all of these important facets of care
is clearly beyond the scope of the present statement; however, these aspects are
important, and resources may be found elsewhere, such as in the recommendations
for the comprehensive care of patients with dementia recently published by a
Canadian consensus group and other evidence-based strategies for care based on
those recommendations. 307 , 391 , 392

There is pathological and clinical evidence for cholinergic compromise
in VCI as occurs in Alzheimer disease. 393 – 395 Double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized clinical trials lasting 6 months
have tested the efficacy of cholinesterase inhibitors in cognitive, global, and
daily functioning in VaD. The same assessment tools as used in Alzheimer disease
trials were administered. 390 The resultant evidence is summarized in Table
3 .

The donepezil trials focused on “pure” VaD (n=1219), in
which placebo groups were stable over 6 months, requiring improvement to show
efficacy. Cognitive benefit was found, but global and functional efficacy was
less consistent in the individual studies. 396 , 400 A post hoc
analysis in a recent large randomized controlled trial of donepezil in VaD
(n=974) showed that as assessed by a standardized visual rating scale, patients
with hippocampal atrophy who received placebo declined more than those without
hippocampal atrophy, who remained cognitively stable. This finding suggests that
hippocampal volume may need to be accounted for in future VaD trials. 398 The side-effect profile was
similar to that of donepezil for Alzheimer disease trials. In a recent study,
however, more deaths occurred in the donepezil treatment group; this was
attributed to the less than expected death rate in the placebo group. 398 An 18-week study of
donepezil in 168 patients with CADASIL had a neutral result but showed benefit
in executive function measures in secondary analysis. 408

Galantamine was evaluated in patients with pure VaD (n=252) and
Alzheimer disease/VaD (n=295). 403 There was statistically significant less decline in
cognition, function, and behavior with galantamine, driven by the mixed
subgroup, whereas subjects treated with placebo showed decline. The pure VaD
subgroup was underpowered statistically to show definite benefit. A subsequent
study of “pure” VaD patients (n=788) showed cognitive treatment
benefits, including benefit for an executive measure but not for daily
functions; however, there was an overall trend for global benefit
( P =0.06). 401

Rivastigmine has been less well studied, but beneficial effects on an
executive measure were found in a 22-month, open-label controlled (n=16)
study 409 and in a
double-blind placebo-controlled trial targeting vascular cognitive impairment,
no dementia (n=50). 405 Two
studies with memantine, an N -methyl d -aspartate
antagonist, likewise showed cognitive benefit without global or functional
benefit. 406 , 407

Cochrane reviews of VaD trials concluded that donepezil studies have
provided the best available evidence for a beneficial effect for VaD 397 and galantamine for mixed
states, 402 whereas a
benefit of memantine 410 and
rivastigmine is still not proven. 404 The adverse effect safety profile is generally similar
to that of Alzheimer disease studies. One meta-analysis commented that the
cognitive benefits of cholinergic agents and memantine were of uncertain
clinical significance in VaD, and more data are required before widespread use
of these agents is to be considered. 411 Whether there are any differential benefits within or
between the drug classes is not clear from the available evidence, because no
head-to-head trials have been conducted.

Trials have been conducted with other compounds, including
cytidinediphosphocholine, 412 , 413 nimodipine, 414 piracetam, 415 huperzine A, 416 and
vinpocetine, 417 but
so far without convincing data, although nimodipine and huperzine, especially
for small-vessel disease, seem worthy of further study. A small study of
sertraline showed benefits on the Executive Interview (EXIT-25), an executive
function test. 418

Specific pharmacotherapy trials targeting VaD have shown
consistent, modest cognitive improvements with donepezil, galantamine, and
memantine, but functional and global benefits have been less consistent,
with evidence only from 2 large donepezil trials. In trials of galantamine,
less decline in cognitive, functional and global outcomes was shown in trial
results driven by participants with mixed VaD/Alzheimer disease. The adverse
effect profile is similar to that seen in Alzheimer disease trials. More
clinical trial evidence would be helpful, including pharmacoeconomic
evaluations. In the future, case selection and outcomes should use the
updated clinical criteria, more sensitive executive function measures, and
advanced imaging biomarkers that better quantify atrophy and vascular brain
injury, including diffusion tensor and perfusion imaging, and possibly
amyloid labeling or cerebrospinal fluid markers to detect concomitant
Alzheimer pathology.

Donepezil can be useful for cognitive enhancement in
patients with VaD (Class IIa; Level of Evidence
A).

Administration of galantamine can be beneficial for
patients with mixed Alzheimer disease/VaD (Class IIa; Level
of Evidence A).

The benefits of rivastigmine and memantine are not well
established in VaD (Class IIb; Level of Evidence
A).

Nondrug therapies have been examined for treatment or adjunctive
management of VCI. Lifestyle factors such as diet, physical activity, and social
support networks were reviewed in the lifestyle section of this statement. Few
nonpharmaco-logical therapies have been tested and found to be beneficial in the
VCI population. Two therapies reported in the Cochrane reviews are cognitive
rehabilitation and acupuncture.

Cognitive rehabilitation and cognitive stimulation so far have not
proven effective. 419 , 420 However, there are few
randomized controlled trials, and there are methodological limitations in
existing studies in the area. Acupuncture showed cognitive benefit in a rodent
model of VaD, 421 but a
Cochrane review of acupuncture in human VaD was inconclusive, 422 which indicates that more
studies are needed.

Only limited evidence exists to support nonpharmacological
modalities for management of VCI. No formal recommendations for therapy are
offered. More research with rigorous designs to study the effects of
nonpharmacological interventions, including cognitive rehabilitation and
acupuncture, is needed.

## 11. Prospects for Prevention of VCI and Alzheimer Disease by Risk Factor
Control
Because the most common forms of dementia affect the elderly, even a
modest delay in the appearance or worsening of cognitive deterioration could
translate into a relatively large reduction of the incidence of disease. Such
people might die of competing causes before manifesting the symptoms of
dementia. It has been estimated, for example, that among the 106 million cases
of Alzheimer disease expected worldwide by the year 2050, ≈23 million
could be avoided completely if it were possible to delay the onset of disease by
2 years. 423

In relation to the role of vascular risk factors, during midlife the
population-attributable risk of dementia has been reported to be highest for
hypertension (up to 30% of cases of late-life dementia). Furthermore, on the
basis of observational epidemiological data, diabetes conveys a high risk of
dementia. Vascular and metabolic risk factors should therefore be regarded as
potential major targets for the prevention of dementia. The timing of such
interventions may be important, because the association with dementia appears to
be stronger for vascular factors and when measured in midlife rather than in old
age, which suggests that midlife may be a critical period. 424 In addition, safeguarding
normal cognitive development during childhood and adolescence based on the new
understanding of the importance of early-life factors for adult health and
disease, 425 as well
as for cognitive function, is a prerequisite for prevention of cognitive
impairment. 426 The
importance of balanced nutrition in early life for normal neurocognitive
development, a process that is not finished until late adolescence, has been
widely recognized. 427

An association between midlife hypertension and late-life
cognitive decline or dementia has been found in a majority of
observational studies, including cohort studies with follow-up spanning
several decades. Results of studies on blood pressure measured in late
life and dementia are less consistent, with most finding no association
with hypertension or an association with low blood pressure and
dementia. 343 , 428

Several longitudinal studies have assessed the impact of the
use of antihypertensive drugs on the risk of dementia ( Table 4 ). Mean duration of
follow-up was ≤5 years for most studies, except 2 studies with a
follow-up of 13 429 and 19 430 years and
that included participants who were a younger age at inclusion. In HAAS
there was a large enough range of duration of follow-up to study the
effect of duration of treatment >12 years. 431 In none of these
studies was antihypertensive treatment associated with an increased risk
of dementia. In 3 studies there was no association between hypertension
treatment and risk of Alzheimer disease, 432 – 434 whereas in others there was a decreased risk
of Alzheimer disease among those receiving antihypertensive
treatment. 429 , 431 , 435 – 437 Interestingly, 2 analyses of the same study
showed different results according to the duration of follow-up: no
effect on dementia and Alzheimer disease in a first study with only 2.2
years of follow-up 432 and a 5% reduction in risk of dementia per year of treatment (6% for
Alzheimer disease) in a study with a much longer follow-up. 429 Longer duration of
treatment and lower age were associated with a stronger protective
effect. 429 This pattern of increased protection for dementia and Alzheimer disease
with an increased duration of antihypertensive treatment was also found
in HAAS. 431

Regarding type of treatment, results were less consistent.
Several studies were unable to show any evidence of the effect of a
particular class of antihypertensive drugs. 429 , 430 , 432 , 434 In both the
Kungsholmen project 435 and the Cache County Study, 436 a stronger effect of
diuretics and particularly potassium-sparing diuretics for the
latter 436 was
found compared with other antihypertensive drugs. These findings,
however, were based on a limited follow-up, a relatively small number of
dementia cases, and confounding by indication. In a recently published
study, 3 treatment groups were compared in a large US Veterans Affairs
administrative database composed almost exclusively of men (98%).
Patients treated with angiotensin receptor blockers were found to have a
lower risk of dementia and Alzheimer disease than those treated with
lisinopril, an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor, or with other
cardiovascular drugs. 438 By comparing angiotensin receptor blockers with an
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor, 2 classes of drug similar in
novelty and price, this study is a remarkable attempt to overcome
confounding by indication. The use of administrative databases, however,
is subject to limitations such as a lack of precision concerning
diagnosis of dementia and Alzheimer disease or the impossibility of
taking into account potential major confounders such as educational
level. Furthermore, the follow-up was relatively short, and ethnic
disparities were not assessed. These findings, therefore, need to be
confirmed in similar settings or randomized trials.

To summarize: Observational studies point to some benefit of
antihypertensive treatment for risk for Alzheimer
disease. The longer the duration of treatment, the stronger
the preventive effect. Treatment appears more effective in the youngest
old than in the oldest people. A few studies suggest a greater effect of some
classes of antihypertensive therapy, but the evidence
remains limited and is subject to bias so that no firm
conclusion can be drawn about this relationship.

Observational studies point to some benefit of
antihypertensive treatment for risk for Alzheimer
disease.

The longer the duration of treatment, the stronger
the preventive effect.

Treatment appears more effective in the youngest
old than in the oldest people.

A few studies suggest a greater effect of some
classes of antihypertensive therapy, but the evidence
remains limited and is subject to bias so that no firm
conclusion can be drawn about this relationship.

Six large randomized trials of antihypertensive drugs included an
assessment of dementia and cognitive function. 440 – 445 Four of these trials reported that treatment had
no clear-cut effect on the risk of dementia 440 , 441 , 443 , 444 or cognitive
function. 441 , 443 , 444 However, 1 study reported a beneficial
effect on the risk of dementia, 442 and another reported an effect on the risk of
PSD 445 ( Tables 5 and 6 ).

In the Systolic Hypertension in the Elderly Program
(SHEP), 440 a
similar rate of dementia was found in the group receiving active treatment
with a diuretic and/or β -blocker (1.6%) and the
group receiving placebo (1.9%). A recent reanalysis of the SHEP data
suggests that differential dropout may have biased the treatment effect
toward the null. 447

The Study on Cognition and Prognosis in the Elderly
(SCOPE) 443 , 448 was designed to evaluate
the effect of treatment with an angiotensin receptor blocker with or without
a diuretic on cognitive function in 4937 nondemented elderly hypertensive
subjects. There was no major treatment effect on cognition. 443 This lack of benefit
must be interpreted in the context of small blood pressure differences
observed between the active treatment group and the control group (3.2/1.6
mm Hg). Although initially planned as a trial of an angiotensin receptor
blocker versus placebo, during the trial and for ethical reasons,
antihypertensive drugs were administered to patients in the control group.
Therefore, between-group blood pressure differences and the study power were
reduced. A post hoc reanalysis of the data in patients not receiving add-on
therapy after randomization, although showing evidence of a stronger effect
on cardiovascular events, mortality, and vascular mortality, did not change
the neutral result on cognition and dementia. 448

The most compelling support for the prevention of dementia by blood
pressure lowering was observed in the Systolic Hypertension Europe
(Syst-Eur) trial. 442 , 449 The trial was stopped
prematurely after a median follow-up period of 2 years on evidence of
significant benefits from treatment with nitrendipine for lowering the risk
of stroke. Dementia was diagnosed in 21 patients from the placebo group and
11 patients from the active treatment group, corresponding to a 50% (95%
confidence interval 0% to 76%) decrease in the incidence of dementia in
subjects receiving active treatment. Most cases of dementia were Alzheimer
disease. In an open-label follow-up study of the same patients in the trial,
the principal result was confirmed with twice as many cases of
dementia. 450 In
the extension study, both Alzheimer disease and VaD were reduced by
treatment with nitrendipine.

In the Perindopril Protection Against Recurrent Stroke Study
(PROGRESS), 6105 patients with a history of stroke or transient ischemic
attack were randomly assigned to an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor,
perindopril, with or without a diuretic compared with placebo. Combination
therapy reduced systolic and diastolic blood pressure by 12 and 5 mm Hg,
respectively, and stroke risk by 43%. 451 During the 4-year follow-up, dementia was
diagnosed in 410 patients, of whom 108 had dementia preceded by a stroke.
Overall, there was a nonsignificant 12% (range –8% to –28%)
reduction in the risk of dementia in the active treatment group. Evaluation
within 2 dementia subgroups (with or without prior stroke), however, showed
a significant reduction in the risk of dementia with active treatment in
patients with a prior history of stroke compared with patients without prior
stroke (34% versus 1%; P =0.03). A similar result was
observed for cognitive decline, defined as a drop of ≥3 points in the
MMSE. 445 Furthermore, in a PROGRESS MRI substudy, it was shown that active blood
pressure lowering stopped or delayed the progression of white matter
hyperintensities. 452

In the Hypertension in the Very Elderly Cognitive Function
(HYVET-COG) study, 3336 patients >80 years of age with systolic blood
pressure >160 mm Hg were treated with slow-release indapamide plus or
minus perindopril or placebo. The treatment was found to have no effect on
the risk of dementia or cognitive decline. 444 The trial was stopped prematurely,
however, after a mean of 2.2 years of follow-up because of a significant
reduction in stroke and total mortality.

All published trials share common limitations: (1) short follow-up
duration 442 , 444 ; (2) heterogeneity in
screening and diagnosis of dementia 441 ; (3) patients at low risk for dementia (young mean
age) 441 , 445 and with high baseline
MMSE; (4) small numbers of incident cases and low statistical power; and (5)
differential dropout, which could lead to overestimating or underestimating
the treatment effect.

To date, 5 meta-analyses have been published on the risk of
dementia in antihypertensive trials ( Table
7 ). To summarize: These studies had variable methods in relation to model
type (fixed or random) and selection of patients. 453 , 454 None examined all 5 trials combined, even among those
most recently published. 444 , 455 Only 1 trial found that the risk for dementia was
significantly decreased, but it was embedded in the report of
the HYVET results, and its description was scant, especially
concerning selection criteria for the studies. Overall, the variance for reduction of risk for
dementia ranged from 11% to 20% ( Table 7 ).

These studies had variable methods in relation to model
type (fixed or random) and selection of patients. 453 , 454

None examined all 5 trials combined, even among those
most recently published. 444 , 455

Only 1 trial found that the risk for dementia was
significantly decreased, but it was embedded in the report of
the HYVET results, and its description was scant, especially
concerning selection criteria for the studies.

Overall, the variance for reduction of risk for
dementia ranged from 11% to 20% ( Table 7 ).

The Systolic Blood Pressure Intervention Trial (SPRINT) is designed
to test whether lowering blood pressure beyond recommended levels can
provide an added benefit. In this trial, 7500 patients >55 years of
age with systolic blood pressure ≥130 mm Hg and at least 1 other
vascular risk factor (hypercholesterolemia, smoking) will be randomized to
an “aggressive” treatment arm with a target systolic blood
pressure of <120 mm Hg and a more “routine” arm with a
target systolic blood pressure of <140 mm Hg. Patients will be
followed up for a minimum of 4 years. The trial began in the fall of 2010
and includes a substudy of cognition (SPRINT-MIND) funded by the National
Institute on Aging and NINDS.

Observational studies point to some benefit of antihypertensive
treatment on the risk for Alzheimer disease, the treatment being
apparently more effective in the youngest old than in the oldest
people.

Few large blood pressure–lowering trials have
incorporated cognitive assessment and diagnosis of dementia. They share
several limitations, and therefore, considerable uncertainty remains
about the efficacy of antihypertensive drugs for lowering the risk of
dementia in general and Alzheimer disease in particular.

Meta-analyses neither prove nor disprove the efficacy of
antihypertensive treatment on the risk of dementia. They are subject to
limitations similar to those of therapeutic trials and do not yield any
substantial additional information. An individual patient data
meta-analysis could be useful because it could allow proper assessment
of potentially major effect modifiers such as age, blood pressure level,
and cognitive level at baseline. It could also be of help in identifying
high-risk groups for further trials.

In patients with stroke, lowering blood pressure is
effective for reducing the risk of PSD (Class I; Level
of Evidence B).

There is reasonable evidence that in the middle-aged
and young-elderly, lowering blood pressure can be useful for the
prevention of late-life dementia (Class IIa; Level of
Evidence B).

The usefulness of lowering blood pressure in people
>80 years of age for the prevention of dementia is not
well established (Class IIb; Level of Evidence
B).

Patients with diabetes of long duration are at increased risk of
cognitive decline, dementia, and depression, as well as other phenotypes
associated with aging. 438a Among risk factors for cognitive dysfunction and dementia, it has been
documented that both hyperglycemia and hyperinsulinemia, as part of the
metabolic process leading to type 2 diabetes mellitus, are associated with
cognitive dysfunction and stroke dementia. This is often accompanied by other
disturbances of mental function, such as depression or anxiety, all of these
conditions being described as being more prevalent in established type 2
diabetes mellitus. 438a

The treatment of hyperglycemia is associated with prevention of both
microvascular and, to some degree, macrovascular events, based on data from a
recent meta-analysis. 457 However, the prevention of stroke has not been shown with careful control of
blood glucose, and no studies have specifically investigated possible protective
effects by reduction of hyperglycemia in mild VCI or early stages of dementia.
Thus, intensified treatment of hyperglycemia is not protective of
stroke, 457 a risk
factor for cognitive decline. In severe cases of hyperglycemia, the cognitive
dysfunction is acutely impaired by hyperosmolar influences and electrolyte
disturbances, conditions that are possible to improve by acute insulin
therapy.

In the ADVANCE trial (Action in Diabetes and Vascular Disease: Preterax
and Diamicron Modified Release Controlled Evaluation), the combined approach to
treat both hyperglycemia and hypertension has been effective to reduce
macrovascular end points and mortality. It was concluded that cognitive
dysfunction is an independent predictor of clinical outcomes in patients with
type 2 diabetes mellitus but does not modify the effects of blood pressure
lowering or glucose control on the risk of major cardiovascular
events. 458

On the basis of a systematic review, there is no convincing evidence
relating type or intensity of diabetic treatment to the prevention or management
of cognitive impairment in type 2 diabetes mellitus. 459 The possible effect of intensive
control–induced hypoglycemia on cognitive function represents a relevant
and yet-to-be-explored aspect in older people with diabetes.

Diabetes is an important risk factor for mental symptoms and
cognitive impairment, but available data are based mostly on
observational studies. The level of evidence for a protective effect of
reduction of hyperglycemia is very low. Further intervention studies are
needed to elucidate the role of reduction of hyperglycemia in prevention
of cognitive impairment and dementia. Also, new antidiabetes drugs have
to be tested in relation to prevention of cognitive impairment or
dementia. There is a need to support new studies on the role of
hyperglycemia and cognitive impairment and whether correction of
hyperglycemia with old and new drugs could influence this process.

The effectiveness of treating diabetes/hyperglycemia
for the prevention of dementia is not well established (Class IIb; Level of Evidence C).

Hyperlipidemia or dyslipidemia is a metabolic condition of importance
for cognitive function. Treatment with statin therapy has been documented to
protect against stroke, both in primary 460 and secondary studies, based on data from
meta-analysis 36 and a
single trial, Stroke Prevention by Aggressive Reduction in Cholesterol Levels
(SPARCL). 461

In the Prospective Study of Pravastatin in the Elderly at Risk
(PROSPER), after 4 years of treatment, no difference in cognitive function was
shown, as evaluated by the MMSE, between patients receiving pravastatin or
placebo. 358 Several
meta-analyses have concluded that there is no measurable influence of statin
therapy on cognitive dysfunction in humans, 462 even if animal experiments in rodents have supported
the notion that some protection is offered by statin therapy. 463 One statin intervention
study completed in 2007 has not been presented thus far: the Cholesterol
Lowering Agent to Slow Progression (CLASP) of Alzheimer's Disease
Study. 463a In the
recently published Lipitor's Effect in Alzheimer's Dementia (LEADe) trial, which
included 640 randomized patients with mild Alzheimer disease, intensive lipid
lowering by the addition of atorvastatin (80 mg) to donepezil did not improve
cognitive function over a 72-week period. 464

Although lipid control by statin therapy is able to prevent
stroke, these drugs do not prevent cognitive decline in the elderly.
There is scant evidence from observational studies on the effects of
statin therapy on cognitive function, and the level of evidence is low.
There is a need to support new studies on the role of hyperlipidemia and
cognitive impairment and whether correction of hyperlipidemia with drug
therapy could influence this process.

The usefulness of treatment of hyperlipidemia for
prevention of dementia is uncertain (Class IIb; Level of
Evidence C).

Some observational studies have suggested a beneficial effect of
aspirin on cognition, 465 , 466 although this was not
confirmed in others. 467 , 468 Few trials on
antiplatelet therapy have included a cognitive evaluation. 441 , 469 In the Aspirin for Asymptomatic
Atherosclerosis (AAA) trial, 3350 participants 50 to 75 years of age were
randomly assigned to receive long-term use of enteric-coated aspirin 100 mg
once daily or placebo. During a 5-year follow-up, no difference in cognitive
ability was found between the aspirin and placebo arms. 469 In the Prevention
Regimen for Effectively Avoiding Second Strokes (PRoFESS) trial, 20 332
patients with ischemic stroke were randomly assigned in a 2×2
factorial design to receive either 25 mg of aspirin and 200 mg of
extended-release dipyridamole twice a day or 75 mg of clopidogrel once a day
and either 80 mg of telmisartan or placebo once a day to test primarily for
recurrent stroke prevention, with cognitive decline or dementia as a
nonprimary end point. After a median follow-up of 2.4 years, no difference
was observed between the 2 antiplatelet regimens on any measure of cognition
(median MMSE score ≤24) or severe cognitive decline (decrease in MMSE
score ≥3 points between baseline and penultimate visit) or
dementia. 441

A few observational studies have documented that people who consume
a Mediterranean diet have better cognition and less risk of dementia than
people consuming other diets. 470 Recently, a better adherence to a
Mediterranean-type dietary pattern was associated with less cognitive
decline in a community with older subjects. 471 There is no randomized controlled study
of similar effects in healthy subjects.

The same beneficial effects of increased physical activity on
cognitive function have also been documented in observational
studies, 472 but
only 1 small intervention trial has followed up subjects for cognitive
improvement after increasing physical exercise. Aerobic exercise has been
shown to be useful. A study of 6 months’ duration in elderly women
provides support, using rigorous controlled methodology, for a potent
nonpharmacological intervention that improves executive control processes
for older women at high risk of cognitive decline. 473 At the same time, it would be
informative to understand why some cognitive functions seem to improve with
aerobic physical exercise whereas other functions seem to be insensitive to
physical exercise. 474 The
results of a recently published meta-analysis on the effect of physical
activity on cognitive decline, based on 15 observational studies, suggest a
significant and consistent protection afforded by all levels of physical
activity against the occurrence of cognitive decline. 475

Smoking is a risk factor for stroke-associated dementia. There are
no intervention studies to prove the benefits of smoking cessation on
preserving cognitive function.

Studies have been performed to test whether vitamin supplements
might improve cognitive function. According to 1 systematic review, there
was no beneficial effect of folic acid 750 μ g/d on
measures of cognition or mood in healthy older women. 476

In patients with mild to moderate cognitive decline and different
forms of dementia, there was no benefit from folic acid on measures of
cognition or mood. 476 However, in another study from The Netherlands, supplementation with 800 μ g daily of oral folic acid for 3 years in 818
participants significantly improved domains of cognitive function that tend
to decline with age. 477

With regard to lowering homocysteine by vitamin B supplementation,
no benefit was shown in 1 Australian study that included 276 healthy elderly
subjects with repeated tests of cognitive function after 1 and 2
years. 478

Adherence to a Mediterranean-type dietary pattern has been
associated with less cognitive decline in several observational
studies.

There is generally a lack of evidence for a positive benefit of
antiaggregants and vitamin supplementation on cognitive function. No
improvement of cognitive function has been proven when reduction of
homocysteine was reached with supplementation with vitamin B. Therefore,
evidence for these interventions is lacking, and they cannot be
recommended.

A few observational studies and very few intervention trials
have shown that lifestyle modification (eg, diet, physical activity) may
improve cognitive function. Even though smoking is a well-known risk
factor for vascular pathology, the role of smoking cessation has not
been studied in relation to changes in cognitive function.

There is only limited evidence to support the idea that
physical therapy could contribute to prevention of cognitive decline.
There is a need to support new studies on the role of lifestyle
interventions to prevent cognitive impairment and whether smoking
cessation could influence this process.

A Mediterranean-type dietary pattern has been
associated with less cognitive decline in several studies and
may be reasonable (Class IIb; Level of Evidence
B).

Vitamin supplementation is not proven to improve
cognitive function, even if homocysteine levels have been
positively influenced, and its usefulness is not well
established (Class IIb; Level of Evidence
B).

Physical activity might be considered for the
prevention of cognitive impairment (Class IIb; Level of
Evidence B), but the usefulness of other lifestyle
or vitamin interventions is uncertain (Class IIb; Level
of Evidence B).

The effectiveness of antiaggregant therapy for VCI is
not well established (Class IIb; Level of Evidence
B).

## 12. Summary and Course of Action
In developed countries, a rapid increase in the aged population is
anticipated. In 2000, for example, there were 600 million people ≥60 years of
age; it is estimated that by 2025 there will be 1.2 billion people in this age
group, and by 2050, 2 billion. The oldest people in our population (≥80 years
old) are a fast-growing group, and ≈20% experience important difficulties in
performance of activities of daily living. Furthermore, cognitive impairment is a
relatively common condition of the elderly that significantly affects their ability
to live independently. The prevalence of dementia increases with advancing age and
is estimated to affect ≥30% of people >80 years of age, 264 , 479 , 480 with the
annual cost of care being >$40 000 per patient in the United States.
Identification of people at risk for cognitive impairment or mild forms of cognitive
impairment (eg, MCI, VaMCI) holds promise for prevention or postponement of dementia
and its sequelae and for public health cost savings. 23 , 481 , 482 The opportunity to prevent or
postpone cognitive impairment may be realized by assessment of cardiovascular and
stroke risks and appropriate treatment of such risk markers. Cognitive function, an
important predictor of morbidity and mortality in the elderly, however, is
frequently not screened for in clinical practice as part of global cardiovascular
risk and target-organ damage assessments.

As discussed in this statement, understanding of common causes of late-life
cognitive impairment and dementia—Alzheimer disease and VCI—has
advanced. 483 It is now
accepted that many of the traditional risk factors for stroke are also risk markers
for Alzheimer disease and VCI. 16 , 31 , 340 , 484 – 491 In fact, there is an
angiogenesis hypothesis for Alzheimer disease and a possible role for genes in
neurovascular unit dysfunction in Alzheimer disease. 107 , 492 Therefore, it has been proposed that there may be a convergence of pathogenic
mechanisms in vascular and neurodegenerative processes that cause impairment of
cognition. 101 , 493 Epidemiological evidence to
support the convergence of mechanisms is observed in studies that show traditional
cardiovascular risk factors also heighten risk of Alzheimer disease. For example, in
a cohort in Finland, the combination of elevated systolic blood pressure,
hypercholesterolemia, and obesity increased the risk of Alzheimer disease by
≈6 times, whereas individually, any of these factors alone increased risk by
≈2 times. 494

The epidemiological observations mentioned previously coupled with
preclinical study findings have allowed us to consider shifting our prevention focus
to more “upstream” targets such as shared vascular risk
markers, 484 – 486 extrinsic (eg, somatic and
mitochondrial mutations, advanced glycation end products, proinflammatory cytokines)
and intrinsic (eg, telomere shortening, decreased decline in growth factors,
apoptosis) mechanistic pathways that may influence prevention outcomes, 495 and other novel
approaches. 107 Furthermore, we may now consider the possibility that Alzheimer disease is actually
Alzheimer diseases, a group of disorders that could possibly be driven by different
pathophysiological mechanisms. 496 Support for this notion is based on evidence of disparate pathophysiological
mechanisms by which vascular risk factors such as hypertension, diabetes, and
dyslipidemia might cause or potentiate Alzheimer disease. Other data (F.T., P.B.G.,
unpublished data, 2010).

In addition, as subclinical CVBI, stroke, and vascular risk factors have
been a major focus of this statement, a better understanding of the prevention of
“silent” strokes and WMLs (ie, “covert” brain injury) is
necessary, because these events may be associated with neuropsychological deficits
and contribute to VCI and eventual manifest stroke sequelae risk. 498 It is estimated that
“silent” strokes outnumber clinically manifest ones by a factor of
>9:1, and the proportion of those with a milder form of VCI is approximately
2-fold greater than those with a severe form of VCI (ie, VaD). This group of
patients with covert brain injury might be one that is well suited for
proof-of-concept studies of vascular risk factor control strategies.

In summary, this statement has discussed controversies in relation to
vascular causes of cognitive impairment and dementia and the evidence for the role
of vascular factors, arterial aging, and CVBI in cognitive impairment. A current
course of action for furthering our understanding of vascular contributions to
cognitive impairment and dementia has been recommended previously. 499 It takes into account
transdisciplinary, translational, and transactional opportunities and recommends
taking advantage of shared pathophysiological mechanisms of many brain diseases that
may influence cognition, cross-disciplinary expertise, new therapeutic targets for
planning clinical trials, the underexplored and under-exploited borderlands between
stroke and Alzheimer disease, the “brain at risk” or in the
disease-induction stage, and systematic integration strategies.

To develop an action plan, we need to consider establishment of the
following research programs to advance the field: Continued development, validation, and refinement of
practicable cognitive batteries for testing people with VCI within and
across geographic, cultural, and ethnic regions. 5 Continued pursuit of novel neuroimaging methodology to identify
biomarkers and risks for CVBI associated with VCI. 500 Establishment of additional longitudinal
clinical-neuropathological studies with neuroradiological
correlation. Development of nationally funded centers of excellence for the
study of CVBI and vascular contributions to cognitive impairment and
dementia with transdisciplinary, translational, and transactional links
within and between centers. Midlife and later-life cost-effectiveness research and proper,
statistically powered, randomized controlled clinical trials targeting
key vascular risk markers and the influence of their control on
prevention of VCI and Alzheimer disease. 496 Preclinical and clinical studies to better understand the
influence of aging on major arteries and the neurovascular unit. Studies to identify novel risk markers for vascular
contributions to cognitive impairment and dementia. Studies to better understand the relationship between location,
severity, and extent of vascular brain injury and the resultant
cognitive syndromes, while simultaneously accounting for coexisting
age-related pathologies and cognitive reserve. These programs should
include a search for genetic and other novel factors with an overarching
goal to identify new strategies for prevention or treatment of VCI.
Preliminary study of interventions among people with vascular risk
factors and clinically defined CVBI may be a first step for testing
prevention strategies before embarking on full-scale clinical
trials. With such advances in the field in basic science, pharmacology,
epidemiology, neuroradiology, and neuropathology, we will then be better positioned
to guide clinicians in relation to practice challenges such as the following: Choice of neuropsychological test battery and frequency of
neuropsychological testing to detect VCI and related forms of cognitive
impairment. Value of and targets for control of various cardiovascular risk
factors to prevent cognitive impairment. Application and interpretation of genetic and other novel
vascular risk markers for VCI. Currently, in the absence of such definitive data for guidance, we encourage
clinicians to use screening tools to detect cognitive impairment in their older
patients (eg, www.mocatest.org ) and to continue to treat vascular risks according
to nationally or regionally accepted guidelines. Recently published statements in
2011 from the American Heart Association on the prevention of first and recurrent
stroke provide useful targets for risk factor management, although these
recommendations have not been specifically tested in patients with VCI. 501 , 502

Continued development, validation, and refinement of
practicable cognitive batteries for testing people with VCI within and
across geographic, cultural, and ethnic regions. 5

Continued pursuit of novel neuroimaging methodology to identify
biomarkers and risks for CVBI associated with VCI. 500

Establishment of additional longitudinal
clinical-neuropathological studies with neuroradiological
correlation.

Development of nationally funded centers of excellence for the
study of CVBI and vascular contributions to cognitive impairment and
dementia with transdisciplinary, translational, and transactional links
within and between centers.

Midlife and later-life cost-effectiveness research and proper,
statistically powered, randomized controlled clinical trials targeting
key vascular risk markers and the influence of their control on
prevention of VCI and Alzheimer disease. 496

Preclinical and clinical studies to better understand the
influence of aging on major arteries and the neurovascular unit.

Studies to identify novel risk markers for vascular
contributions to cognitive impairment and dementia.

Studies to better understand the relationship between location,
severity, and extent of vascular brain injury and the resultant
cognitive syndromes, while simultaneously accounting for coexisting
age-related pathologies and cognitive reserve. These programs should
include a search for genetic and other novel factors with an overarching
goal to identify new strategies for prevention or treatment of VCI.
Preliminary study of interventions among people with vascular risk
factors and clinically defined CVBI may be a first step for testing
prevention strategies before embarking on full-scale clinical
trials.

Choice of neuropsychological test battery and frequency of
neuropsychological testing to detect VCI and related forms of cognitive
impairment.

Value of and targets for control of various cardiovascular risk
factors to prevent cognitive impairment.

Application and interpretation of genetic and other novel
vascular risk markers for VCI.