# Title
A pathophysiological framework of hippocampal dysfunction in ageing and disease

# Abstract
The hippocampal formation has been implicated in a growing number of disorders, from Alzheimer's disease and cognitive ageing to schizophrenia and depression. How can the hippocampal formation, a complex circuit that spans the temporal lobes, be involved in a range of such phenotypically diverse and mechanistically distinct disorders? Recent neuroimaging findings indicate that these disorders differentially target distinct subregions of the hippocampal circuit. In addition, some disorders are associated with hippocampal hypometabolism, whereas others show evidence of hypermetabolism. Interpreted in the context of the functional and molecular organization of the hippocampal circuit, these observations give rise to a unified pathophysiological framework of hippocampal dysfunction.

## Organization of the hippocampal formation
The hippocampal formation spans the posterior-to-anterior extent of the base of the temporal lobes ( FIG. 1a ). In its transverse axis the hippocampal formation is organized as a mainly unidirectional circuit made up of multiple subregions — the entorhinal cortex, the dentate gyrus, the CA1 and CA3 subfields, and the subiculum 9 ( FIG. 1b ). Notably, in his classic study, Lorente de Nó — who first parsed the hippocampal formation using the Cornu Ammonis nomenclature — also described the CA2 subfield 10 . Although there has been renewed interest in CA2, it is not commonly imaged in vivo , and will therefore not be featured in this Review.

In the ‘trisynaptic pathway’, layer II of entorhinal cortex connects to the dentate gyrus through the perforant pathway, and the dentate gyrus connects to CA3 through the mossy fibres. CA3 neurons interconnect with other CA3 neurons up and down the hippocampal long axis through ‘auto-associative’ tracts, or with CA1 through the Shaffer collaterals. Finally, CA1 connects to the subiculum. In addition to this pattern of connectivity, layer II of the entorhinal cortex projects to CA3, and layer III of entorhinal cortex can send direct connections to CA1 and the subiculum ( FIG. 1b ).

The entorhinal cortex serves as the gateway into the hippocampal formation and receives monosynaptic input from numerous regions, including the perirhinal cortex, the parahippocampal cortex, the auditory and olfactory cortices, and the amygdala. The input to the entorhinal cortex is organized in an anterior-to-posterior gradient, and the gradient is largely preserved in the way that the entorhinal cortex connects with the rest of the hippocampus ( FIG. 1a ). So, for example, input from the amygdala connects with anterior and medial aspects of the entorhinal cortex, which then communicate this input to anterior aspects of the hippocampus. By contrast, visual cortex input is delivered to the hippocampal formation through the perirhinal and parahippocampal cortices, which connect to posterior and lateral aspects of the entorhinal cortex, and from there to posterior aspects of the hippocampus.

The subiculum and, to a lesser extent, CA1 are the hippocampal subregions that provide the dominant out-flow of the hippocampal circuit 11 . Both CA1 and the subiculum connect to deep layers of the entorhinal cortex ( FIG. 1b ), which then re-connects — via the parahippocampal gyrus — with neocortical sites that provided the original hippocampal input 12 . This hippocampal– neocortical network has historically received the most attention for its role in the consolidation of long-term memories 13 . Anatomical tracing studies have established that the outflow from the subiculum and CA1 can also bypass the entorhinal cortex, monosynaptically connecting with a range of other brain areas, including the amygdala, the medial prefrontal and orbitofrontal cortices, the anterior and posterior cingulate cortex, and the nucleus accumbens 14 – 16 ( FIG. 1c ). These direct hippocampal efferents show a striking topographical organization, such that the more posterior (dorsal in rodents) part projects to the posterior cingulate cortex, whereas more anterior parts show denser projections to medial prefrontal and orbitofrontal cortices and the amygdala.

The observed input and outflow gradients suggest that the hippocampal long axis is functionally organized, an interpretation that agrees with data from gene expression profiling 4 , 6 , fMRI studies 17 , and electrophysiological studies that have documented long-axis differences in mechanisms of plasticity 18 – 20 and place field activity 21 , 22 . Building on these observations, a range of studies have established that the posterior extents of the hippocampal long axis are more likely to be involved in memory and cognitive processing, whereas the anterior extents of the hippocampal long axis are more involved in other complex behaviours such as stress, emotion, sensory–motor integration and goal-directed activity 4 , 23 – 26 . Notably, and as will be discussed below, the anterior hippocampus and some of its associated outflow areas are key components of networks that are implicated in schizophrenia and depression.

## Hippocampal regional vulnerability
Rather than reviewing all disorders in which the hippocampal formation is implicated, we will focus on a number of major ones, with the purpose of establishing the principle of differential vulnerability. The term ‘differential’ (rather than ‘selective’) is deliberately used: because of connections within the hippocampal circuit, a primary lesion or dysfunction in any subregion can, over time, affect neighbouring subregions. By comparing studies that have mapped patterns of anatomical alterations within the hippocampal circuit, patterns that differentiate disorders can be determined, thereby pinpointing differentially vulnerable and resistant subregions.

For disorders in which there is death of primary hippocampal neurons, mapping patterns of cell loss provides a histological indication of regional vulnerability. In vascular disease, CA1 shows the most reliable loss of neurons 27 , 28 . In Alzheimer's disease, the pattern of cell death and other histological findings suggests that the entorhinal cortex is prominently affected by the disease 29 – 31 , that CA1 and the subiculum are also heavily involved, and that the dentate gyrus and CA3 are relatively preserved 29 , 30 , 32 . Although cell death in TLE 33 is extensive — occurring predominantly in the dentate gyrus and CA subfields — two findings differentiate TLE from Alzheimer's disease. First, the subiculum is a subregion with relatively little cell loss in TLE. Second, although entorhinal cortex cell death is observed in both diseases, it is more pronounced in Alzheimer's disease, in which it starts in layer II, whereas in TLE it seems to be confined to layer III neurons 34 .

High-resolution variants of functional MRI have successfully detected the differential vulnerability of CA1 to vascular disease in living patients 2 . Furthermore, these technologies have been able to detect Alzheimer's disease-associated alterations in entorhinal cortex, CA1 and subiculum, on a background of relatively resistant dentate gyrus and CA3 (REFS 35 – 37 ), and have confirmed that the subiculum is relatively unaffected in TLE 38 . By showing concordance with histologically detected patterns of vulnerability, these observations validate that neuroimaging can accurately map hippocampal pathology in vivo .

The other disorders considered in this Review are notable for their relative absence of loss of primary neurons and are therefore often referred to as ‘functional’ disorders. Mapping patterns of differential vulnerability for this class of disorders is particularly challenging — not only because of the absence of cell death but also because the ‘functional’ pathology readily spreads over time. It is for these disorders that high-resolution neuro-imaging has proven most useful (BOX 1). Neuroimaging techniques can map not only patterns of hippocampal dysfunction in living subjects but, as we will highlight, can also map spread over time. We will begin by reviewing disorders that typically affect the hippocampal formation in later-life and then review those that occur more commonly in younger patients.

Although ageing is itself not a disease, cognitive decline that occurs during ageing has deleterious consequences, and because it occurs without prominent cell loss it is considered a prime example of a functional disorder 39 . A great number of imaging studies have investigated the hippocampal formation in ageing individuals and many findings have been reported. Nevertheless, the effect of ageing on hippocampal function is often confounded by diseases 2 , in particular Alzheimer's disease and vascular disease, which commonly occur in older subjects and can cause hippocampal dysfunction independent of ageing 2 . When attempting to isolate the hippocampal pattern of dysfunction reflective of ageing per se, it is therefore important to exclude the effect of Alzheimer's disease and vascular disease.

The first clues that ageing manifests with a pattern of hippocampal dysfunction that is distinct from Alzheimer's disease or vascular disease came from studies using a high-resolution variant of fMRI that was explicitly developed to map patterns of basal hippocampal metabolism in humans and animal models 40 – 42 . The term ‘basal metabolism’, as historically used in the functional imaging field, refers to the resting-state metabolism in a brain region. This resting-state metabolism can change slowly during ageing or in disease, in contrast with acute changes in metabolism that are evoked by a transient stimulus (BOXES 1,2)). As Alzheimer's disease and vascular disease do not typically occur in non-human primates or rodents, a comparison of fMRI findings across species can isolate a pattern of dysfunction that is differentially linked to ageing. These fMRI variants have been applied to ageing human subjects 43 (with or without Alzheimer's disease 35 and with or without vascular disease 2 ), ageing rhesus monkeys 41 , ageing mice and mice that express disease-causing mutations in the amyloid precursor protein 35 . Besides confirming the differential link of Alzheimer's disease to the entorhinal cortex and vascular disease to CA1, results from these cross-species studies suggested that ageing itself differentially affects the dentate gyrus 2 , 35 , 41 , 43 .

Informed by these fMRI findings, recent studies have set out to develop a cognitive task that can assess the functional integrity of the dentate gyrus in humans. As first theorized by Marr 44 , and empirically established in rodent studies 45 – 48 , the human dentate gyrus plays a part in ‘pattern separation’ 49 , a cognitive operation that allows similar stimuli flowing through the hippocampal circuit to be represented with distinct neural codes. Accordingly, memory tasks have been developed that can assess pattern separation ability in humans 49 . Impairments in these tasks have been documented in ageing subjects 50 , 51 and have been interpreted as confirming previous fMRI findings that implicated the dentate gyrus in normal ageing 39 , 40 . Although the computational process underlying pattern separation occurs within the dentate gyrus itself, impaired performance might also be expected with upstream lesions in the entorhinal cortex, which provides the main dentate gyrus input ( FIG. 1b ). Indeed, impairment in pattern separation tasks has been suggested in subjects who might be in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease, in which the entorhinal cortex is affected 52 . We will return to this point in the last section, in which we discuss how cognitive tests that engage the entorhinal cortex suggest that there are cognitive pheno-types that differentiate Alzheimer's disease from ageing.

Volumetric techniques using structural MRI were originally used to estimate the volume of the entorhinal cortex and the rest of the hippocampus (including the dentate gyrus, CA3, CA1 and the subiculum) as a single region of interest (ROI). Longitudinal studies have shown that although entorhinal cortex shrinkage can be observed at very old ages, the rest of the hippocampus (not the entorhinal cortex) showed a reliable age-related decline across age groups, tracking the time course of age-related memory decline 53 , 54 . More recently, techniques have been developed that can estimate the volumes of the entorhinal cortex as well as the other individual hippocampal subregions, and therefore can pinpoint which subregion is driving the observed effect. Because of the difficulty in visualizing the precise boundaries between the dentate gyrus and CA3, in these studies the two subregions are typically lumped into a single ROI. A study that used these high-resolution techniques to compare patients with Alzheimer's disease with age-matched controls observed Alzheimer's disease-associated shrinkage in the entorhinal cortex, CA1 and subiculum, with sparing of the dentate gyrus or CA3 (REF. 36 ). When evaluating healthy subjects across the age span, the entorhinal cortex was found to be relatively resistant to ageing, with changes isolated in the dentate gyrus and CA3, and in CA1 (REF. 37 ). The effect in dentate gyrus and CA3 was more pronounced and better tracked with the temporal profile of age-related memory decline. Moreover, the ageing effect in CA1 was linked to white matter hyperintensities (S. Mueller, unpublished observations), a marker of vascular disease. A more recent volumetric study also showed age-related effects in CA1, and dentate gyrus and CA3 (REF. 55 ), with relative preservation of entorhinal cortex volume. Here, shrinkage of dentate gyrus and CA3 correlated with age-related memory decline, whereas CA1 shrinkage was associated with hypertension and was therefore interpreted as reflecting the differential sensitivity of CA1 to vascular disease 2 .

fMRI can also be used to map stimulus-induced changes in the blood oxygen level-dependent (BOLD) response, which is thought to reflect evoked neural activity (BOXES 1,2). Recently, a high-resolution variant of BOLD imaging has been developed and has been applied in ageing individuals and patients with Alzheimer's disease. Normal ageing was characterized by an abnormal stimulus-evoked BOLD response that was restricted to the combined dentate gyrus and CA3 ROI, with normal responses observed in the entorhinal cortex and subiculum 51 . By contrast, subjects with presumptive early Alzheimer's disease showed an abnormal evoked BOLD response in both the entorhinal cortex and in the downstream dentate gyrus or CA3 (REF. 52 ). Finally, a recent study investigated ageing subjects using a novel variant of diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) 56 , an MRI-based technique that may detect white matter and dendritic integrity 57 . The authors interpreted their result as being suggestive of perforant path alterations and, importantly, an age-related decrease in dendritic integrity that was localized selectively to dentate gyrus or CA3, and not observed in entorhinal cortex, CA1 or subiculum 58 .

Taken together, the diverse range of imaging studies show that Alzheimer's disease, vascular disease and ageing all contribute to hippocampal alterations in late life, and over time can affect overlapping subregions. Nevertheless, a direct comparison identifies patterns of alterations within the transverse hippocampal circuit that differentiates the three conditions: the entorhinal cortex is differentially associated with Alzheimer's disease, CA1 with vascular disease, and the ageing process per se seems to differentially target the dentate gyrus ( FIG. 2a ). Over the hippocampal long axis, posterior CA1 is differentially affected by vascular disease 59 . Although a systematic investigation of age-related dentate gyrus alterations over the hippocampal long axis has not yet been completed, a recent study suggests that age-related pattern separation defects occur in relatively posterior aspects 58 .

Although they can occur at any age, schizophrenia and depression are diseases that typically begin in adolescence. Triggered by a traumatic event, PTSD can of course also occur at any age. Nevertheless, reflective of current events, the incidence of PTSD is highest in young adults, and we have therefore included a discussion of PTSD in this section.

As well as estimating the volume of individual subregions, mapping alterations in the three-dimensional shape of the hippocampus has emerged as another structural MRI technique that can localize anatomical differences in the hippocampal formation. In patients with schizophrenia, this approach has implicated anterior aspects of the hippocampal long axis and, within the hippocampal circuit, changes were found in the anterior CA1 and subiculum 60 , 61 . Interestingly, these studies suggest that the left hippocampus is typically more affected than the right. A subsequent high-resolution fMRI study that mapped basal hippocampal metabolism in patients with schizophrenia confirmed this pattern 62 . This study also imaged subjects without psychosis who were at risk of developing the disease and, by following the subjects over time, was able to identify patterns of dysfunction in prodromal stages of the disease. The findings suggested that the disease process might start in anterior CA1 and spread, over time, to the anterior subiculum and other brain regions 62 .

Mapping hippocampal shape has also been used to investigate major depressive illness. As with schizophrenia, the greatest difference between the results from patients with depression and controls was predominantly in anterior aspects of the hippocampal long axis 63 , 64 . Within the hippocampal circuit, one study pinpointed shrinkage to the anterior subiculum 63 ( FIG. 2b ). A second study confirmed the finding in the anterior subiculum but also found shrinkage in anterior CA1 (REF. 64 ). Besides technical issues, a main difference between these two studies is that the latter study included elderly subjects and, as the authors suggest, the involvement of CA1 might in part reflect an interaction with diseases of late life, such as vascular disease.

As with schizophrenia, it would be useful to image subjects who are at risk of developing depression to map the earliest prodromal stages of disease. This has not yet been done in humans, but a recent PET study in rhesus monkeys established that the anterior hippocampus is selectively affected in monkeys with ‘anxious temperament’ 65 . Notably, as a trait, anxious temperament in children is an established risk factor for developing depression and anxiety disorders in adulthood 65 (and human studies have suggested a substantial phenotypic and anatomical overlap between anxiety and depressive disorders 66 ).

Numerous volumetric MRI studies have documented a smaller hippocampus in PTSD patients (as first described in REF. 67 ). So far, there is only one high-resolution MRI study that has mapped volumetric differences across hippocampal subregions in PTSD patients and controls 68 . This study reported the greatest volume reduction in a single ROI that included both the dentate gyrus and CA3 ( FIG. 2b ). In the last section, we discuss how, guided by the functional organization of the hippocampal circuit, neuropsychological testing might be able to disambiguate CA3 from dentate gyrus dysfunction, and how cognitive profiles are expected to vary depending on whether dysfunction occurs in the posterior or anterior aspects of the hippocampal long axis.

## Metabolic state and hippocampal dysfunction
Most disorders of the brain are associated with regional changes in basal metabolism. Energy metabolism in neurons requires glucose uptake and oxygen consumption. The metabolic state in any brain structure can be determined in vivo by directly measuring glucose uptake or oxygen consumption using PET, or by indirectly measuring correlates of oxygen consumption: cerebral blood flow (CBF) or cerebral blood volume (CBV) with PET, single-photon emission tomography (SPECT) or fMRI.

It is important to note that although the stimulus-evoked BOLD response measured by fMRI is designed to map transient evoked changes in neural activity, studies have established that the BOLD response is not simply coupled to metabolism 69 , 70 , and therefore by itself cannot characterize the metabolic state of the brain 71 . This limitation applies to normal control subjects, in whom haemodynamic coupling varies across the brain 72 , 73 , but is even more problematic when imaging ageing individuals and patients suffering from disease. The BOLD response is in fact influenced by neurovascular factors 74 – 76 that act as confounds when trying to interpret between-group differences in the BOLD response (BOX 2). These neurovascular factors are affected in ageing and disease 77 , 78 , and unsurprisingly studies have shown that differences in the BOLD response in ageing and disease do not necessarily reflect changes in activity or metabolism 77 , 78 . It is important to emphasize that these limitations can be addressed. For example, it is now possible to calibrate the BOLD response against these neurovascular confounds 74 , thereby deriving a measure of brain metabolism. When changes in the uncalibrated BOLD response are observed in ageing and disease they probably suggest that something is wrong in a particular region, but they do not necessarily inform on abnormalities in neuronal activity, and they certainly cannot determine metabolic abnormalities (BOX 2).

Considering the volume of evidence for hippocampal atrophy and loss of hippocampus-dependent memory function in ageing and disease, it might be expected that functional imaging studies that assess metabolism should document hippocampal hypometabolism in all conditions. This is certainly the case in Alzheimer's disease, in vascular disease and in ageing, in which evidence for hypometabolism has been localized to the entorhinal cortex 35 , 79 , CA1 (REF. 2 ) and the dentate gyrus, respectively 41 , 43 ( FIG. 2a ). Using global measures of hippocampal metabolism, inconsistent results have been found in PTSD 80 – 82 , which perhaps will be clarified in the future with the use of high-resolution technologies.

Notably, however, studies that have imaged hippocampal metabolism in patients with schizophrenia and depression have yielded surprising results. In the case of schizophrenia, a range of functional imaging techniques have clearly established that the hippocampal formation is characterized by an abnormal hypermetabolic state 83 – 87 . Most of these studies used techniques that did not possess high spatial resolution, and simply assessed metabolism in the whole hippocampus. In the one published high-resolution fMRI study, anterior CA1 was found to be especially hypermetabolic in people with schizophrenia, together with hypermetabolism in the anterior subiculum and the orbitofrontal cortex 62 . In the early prodromal stages of the disease, evidence for hypermetabolism was found exclusively in anterior CA1 (REF. 62 ) ( FIG. 2b ).

In depression, some cross-sectional studies comparing patients with healthy controls have found evidence of hippocampal hypermetabolism 88 – 90 . A more consistent observation emerges, however, from a growing number of studies in which patients were imaged before and after receiving pharmacological or behavioural treatments. These studies have found a decrease in metabolism in the global hippocampal formation in association with treatment efficacy (reviewed in REF. 91 ). Thus, the hippocampal formation in patients with depression seems to be in a relative state of hypermetabolism. In agreement with this conclusion, a PET study showed that an ‘anxious temperament’ trait in rhesus monkeys 65 is selectively associated with hypermetabolism in the anterior hippocampus. So far, high-resolution functional imaging techniques have not yet been used in patients with depression, and hence, whether hippocampal hypermetabolism is localized to the subiculum — as might be suggested — remains unknown.

Interestingly, TLE is a disorder in which the hippocampal formation alternates between basal hypometabolism 92 and transient hypermetabolism (reflective of underlying seizures) 93 . Loss of memory function in patients with TLE is seen during hippocampal hypometabolic states and exists, of course, in a more profound manner during active seizures. Informatively, during active seizures psychotic and affective symptoms, such as hallucinations and delusions and alterations in mood that often phenocopy schizophrenia and depression, can also occur 94 , 95 . As seizure activity begins in, and emanates from, the hippocampal formation, abnormal stimulation of hippocampal outflow areas — those that mediate either psychotic or affective behaviour — has been invoked to explain these gain-of-function symptoms in TLE 94 .

## A pathophysiological framework
Based on the wide range of neuroimaging studies reviewed in the previous sections, we propose that any disorder that affects the hippocampal formation does so by differentially targeting specific subregions of the hippocampal circuit, and that this either leads to a decrease or an increase in neuronal metabolism. These two factors — regional vulnerability and metabolic state — provide a framework for how any disorder that affects the hippocampal formation should be characterized ( FIG. 3 ). In this section we will first discuss how, guided by hippocampal functional anatomy, this framework generates hypotheses on how diseases that affect the hippocampal formation might nevertheless manifest with phenotypic variability. Moreover, guided by the molecular anatomy of the hippocampal formation, we will illustrate how this framework provides the basis for understanding mechanisms of disease.

Hippocampus-dependent tests in humans and other mammals were originally developed to assess the hippocampal formation globally, to contrast its function with that of other brain areas or to implicate the hippocampal formation in patients with cognitive impairments 96 . Recently, however, the cognitive importance of individual hippocampal subregions has come to the fore. When empirical studies are interpreted in the context of computational considerations it is possible to begin charting a ‘functional map’ of the hippocampal formation, whereby specific cognitive or computational operations can be differentially linked to individual subregions ( FIG. 3 ). Again, we emphasize the term differential, because obviously all subregions in the hippocampal circuit participate in multiple operations. Although construction of a functional map has only just begun, once charted it will be possible to develop more nuanced neuropsychological tests to assess the integrity of one subregion over another, thereby improving the ability to phenotype and distinguish disorders. At the same time, applying these tests to disorders for which imaging studies have established patterns of hippocampal vulnerability will help to validate emerging theories about the function of individual subregions. For example, showing that ageing manifests with pattern separation deficits 50 , 51 confirms imaging findings (as reviewed above) — which are after all only indirect measures of function — and validates basic studies that have suggested that the dentate gyrus is differentially involved in this cognitive operation.

As mentioned, because the entorhinal cortex is upstream to the dentate gyrus, cell death in this subregion is also expected to cause pattern separation deficits and defects in cognitive operations that are linked to other downstream subregions. In fact, recent studies have suggested that pattern separation deficits might occur in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease (characterized by entorhinal cortex abnormalities) 52 . From a clinical perspective, this introduces the important point that hippocampal subregions really serve two functions: they perform a distinct operation as neural information flows through the circuit, but they also act as conduits that deliver information onto downstream subregions. In this regard, as the entorhinal cortex is the most upstream subregion in the hippocampal circuit, it is important to identify cognitive operations that differentially engage this subregion.

Rodent studies suggest that some cells in the entorhinal cortex, particularly those in its medial aspect, show unique grid-cell properties 97 . A recent human fMRI study described a cognitive task based on predictions extracted from grid-cell properties, and showed that this task activated the entorhinal cortex 98 . The task, however, was found to also activate numerous other brain regions outside the hippocampal formation. A convergence of other findings suggests that the entorhinal cortex is selectively linked to a cognitive operation performed during brief delay periods of hippocampus-dependent tasks. This link was first suggested by unit recordings in monkeys and rats 99 , 100 . Here, sustained activity was observed in the entorhinal cortex during the delay period of matching- or non-matching-to-sample paradigms. In slice preparations, the entorhinal cortex has been found to have electrophysiologically unique ‘persistent-firing’ neurons that show intrinsically-driven, sustained activity lasting minutes 101 . Although they have not yet been confirmed in vivo , persistent-firing neurons have been incorporated into computational models of hippocampal function in which the entorhinal cortex is proposed to act as a ‘memory buffer’ during brief delays 102 , and importantly, these neurons have been linked to the emergence of grid cells in the entorhinal cortex 103 .

These electrophysiological findings have been used to interpret observations in a growing number of human fMRI studies. One study observed sustained activation in a large area that included the entorhinal cortex during a delay in a matching-to-sample task, and sustained activity in this area predicted performance on delayed recognition for visual stimuli 104 , 105 . A separate study, using higher spatial resolution, showed sustained activity that was unambiguously localized to the entorhinal cortex during a delay period in a matching-to-sample task of faces 106 . Although these fMRI studies were interpreted in the context of previous electrophysiological findings, it is notable that stimulus-induced activity was also observed in multiple downstream hippocampal subregions. Two fMRI studies have documented a selective link with the entorhinal cortex. One study found sustained activity in the entorhinal cortex during a memory encoding phase, and the level of sustained activity predicted performance during delayed cue-recall 107 . Another study used fMRI to map basal metabolism in multiple hippocampal subregions in subjects who received an extensive neuropsychological battery of tests outside the scanner. Basal metabolism in the entorhinal cortex was found to differentially correlate with performance on a derived measure of delayed retention 108 .

When these electrophysiological, computational and fMRI studies are viewed as a whole, it is possible to conclude that the entorhinal cortex has an important role in ‘delayed retention’ during brief delays ( FIG. 3 ). Although many tasks, such as delayed matching-to-sample, activate the entorhinal cortex, performance on these tasks does not isolate this cognitive operation. In clinical neuropsychological tests, delayed retention is typically isolated by normalizing the amount of information that is recalled after a delay by the amount of information that is recalled immediately. Defects in this derived measure of delayed retention is one of the hallmark cognitive features of Alzheimer's disease 109 , confirming its link to the entorhinal cortex. Moreover, defects in delayed retention have also been observed in the preclinical stage of the disease, decades before the onset of dementia 110 . Most importantly, delayed retention is one of the few hippocampus-dependent cognitive abilities that is often found to be relatively resistant to ageing compared to Alzheimer's disease 109 , 111 – 113 . These observations confirm neuroimaging findings that suggest that the entorhinal cortex is relatively resistant to the ageing process, and shows how our pathophysiological framework can predict phenotypic differences between Alzheimer's disease and ageing.

In addition to distinguishing the entorhinal cortex from other hippocampal subregions, it is also important to be able to use cognitive tests to assess the function of other hippocampal subregions. As mentioned, in the case of PTSD neuroimaging studies have so far been unable to anatomically dissociate the dentate gyrus from CA3. Therefore, in addition to pattern separation tasks, which engage the dentate gyrus, it would be useful to have neuropsychological tests that differentially assess the functional integrity of CA3. In fact, the CA3 subregion has been linked to a cognitive operation termed pattern completion — the ability to reactivate a complete hippocampus-dependent memory when presented with only a fragment of the memory ( FIG. 3 ). As first described by Lorente de Nó 10 , CA3 is unique in that it contains an ‘association tract’ that connects CA3 neurons up and down the hippocampal long axis ( FIG. 1 ) and, as computationally suggested by Marr 44 , this auto-association system is an anatomical feature that is ideally suited for pattern completion. A mouse fMRI study 114 and in vivo recording studies 115 , 116 have provided empirical confirmation of the importance of CA3 for pattern completion. Interestingly, studies suggest that performance on cognitive tasks that are sensitive to pattern completion are relatively preserved in ageing 50 , supporting the idea that compared with the dentate gyrus, CA3 is relatively preserved.

Based on the functional organization of the hippocampal long axis, reviewed above, we propose that the anterior dentate gyrus and CA3 are involved in pattern separation and pattern completion, respectively, of emotionally charged stimuli, whereas the posterior subregions are predicted to be engaged by stimuli that are emotionally neutral. Although future studies are required to test these specific predictions, BOLD fMRI studies support this long-axis organization 117 , showing, for example, that emotionally charged faces activate the anterior hippocampus 26 , whereas activation of the posterior hippocampus is more typically found when emotionally neutral faces are used 17 . Indeed, the mnemonic defects that are observed in PTSD generally involve memories of emotionally charged stimuli 118 .

Reflecting the dual input that the CA1 subregion receives from layer III entorhinal cortex and from CA3 ( FIG. 1b ), CA1 neurons are well positioned to play a part in integrating or comparing information from these converging sources of input. Computational and electro-physiological studies have confirmed that CA1 has a role as an integrator or comparator of converging entorhinal cortex and CA3 input 119 – 123 . This role has been invoked to explain a human fMRI study that showed that posterior CA1 is differentially activated when subjects encode allocentric spatial information 124 . A recent study has observed selective lesions to CA1 in patients with transient global amnesia, and showed that this CA1-selective lesion was associated with defects in learning in a virtual water maze 125 .

Finally, we come to the last subregion in the hippocampal circuit — the subiculum. A growing number of human fMRI studies have observed that the subiculum shows a differential BOLD response during the retrieval (compared to the encoding) of new hippocampus-dependent memories 106 , 126 – 129 , probably reflecting the fact that the subiculum receives input from CA1 and the entorhinal cortex 130 .

As highlighted, a definitive functional map of the hippocampal formation has not yet been completed. Nevertheless, the studies that are reviewed above establish the principle that such a map exists ( FIG. 3 ), and illustrate the general approach by which this map may be charted with greater certainty. Informed by computational and experimental observations, human neuroimaging — in particular, high-resolution BOLD 131 — will be needed to link specific cognitive operations to distinct subregions, and are likely to show how these operations vary over the hippocampal long axis. For clinical purposes, such a functional map will hopefully guide the development of a new wave of standardized neuropsychological tests ( FIG. 3 ) designed to assess the function of multiple subregions in a single battery. As emphasized, because the hippocampal subregions are interconnected to form a circuit, a ‘lesion’ in one subregion might cause secondary dysfunction in other subregions, and thus impaired performance might be observed in multiple tests. However, by administering an extensive battery, it should be possible to identify the test in which the greatest impairment occurs, thereby pinpointing the anatomical source of hippocampal dysfunction.

Patients who have extensive bilateral resections of the medial temporal lobes (such as the famous patient H.M.), including of the hippocampal formation, develop profound cognitive defects but are notably free of changes in personality or affect 132 . As a hippocampectomy can be considered an extreme version of hippocampal loss of function, this confined cognitive phenotype supports the idea that disorders that manifest with hypometabolism are characterized primarily by cognitive symptoms.

Of course, as shown in TLE, hypermetabolism within the hippocampal formation will also interfere with its mnemonic function, although by its very nature hypermetabolism might not be linked to specific cognitive operations. More interestingly, when hippocampal hypermetabolism is observed in TLE, it can (in addition to a loss of memory function) be associated with a ‘gain’ in psychotic and affective symptoms, thus phenocopying the symptoms of schizophrenia or depression 95 .

This raises the intriguing possibility that the hippocampal hypermetabolism that is observed in schizophrenia and depression may, by stimulating specific hippocampal outflow areas, actually drive the psychotic and affective symptoms that are characteristic of these diseases ( FIG. 4 ). If this is true, then selectively deactivating the hippocampal formation pharmacologically or by other means 133 should ameliorate symptoms. As far as we know, this has never been formally tested as most experimental manipulations do not exclusively target the hippocampal formation. Vagal nerve stimulation reduces hippocampal metabolism and has proven to be an effective treatment for depression, but it reduces metabolism in other brain areas as well 134 . It is also possible that hippocampal hypermetabolism in schizophrenia and depression might, in the long term, entrain hypermetabolism in hippocampal outflow areas by altering their metabolic set-point. In this scenario, hypermetabolism in these areas becomes hippocampus-independent over time, and hippocampus-selective interventions would therefore be effective only if administered during the earliest stages of the disease.

Currently, only correlative observations and animal studies provide evidence for the idea that the hippocampal formation acts as an anatomical driver of gain-of-function symptoms in schizophrenia and depression ( FIG. 4 ). In the case of schizophrenia ( FIG. 4a ), one study found that hippocampal hypermetabolism occurs first, and that orbitofrontal hypermetabolism is observed only later in the disease course 62 . Furthermore, CA1 hyper-metabolism was found to be associated with measures of delusions and hallucinations. As the hippocampus monosynaptically connects with the orbitofrontal cortex 14 , it is possible that hippocampal hypermetabolism acts to drive this later extra-hippocampal effect. The hippocampus also monosynaptically connects with the nucleus accumbens, and animal studies have established a mechanism by which hippocampal hypermetabolism links to increased dopamine release in the ventral striatum. Specifically, increased activity in the ventral hippocampus (equivalent to the anterior hippocampus in humans) stimulates the nucleus accumbens through monosynaptic connections, leading to increased striatal dopamine release 135 ( FIG. 4a ). Not only is increased striatal dopamine release observed in schizophrenia 136 , 137 but elevations in dopamine are a neurochemical cause of psychotic symptoms 137 .

In depression, hypermetabolism occurs, in addition to the hippocampal formation, in multiple regions of the frontal lobe — in particular, the subgenual anterior cingulate and in subregions of the amygdala, caudate, occipital lobe, cerebellum and thalamus 91 . A brain network linked to depression has been suggested based on the connectivity among some of these areas 138 . An important feature of this network is the connection between the hippocampus and the subgenual anterior cingulate ( FIG. 4b ), a connection that was first suggested by tracer studies in non-human primates 14 and confirmed more recently by in vivo imaging in humans 139 . This connection is particularly interesting because selectively reducing hypermetabolism in the subgenual anterior cingulate with deep brain stimulation ameliorates affective symptoms in some patients with depression and anxiety disorders 66 .

Future studies are needed to establish whether there is a causal link between the hippocampal hypermetabolism that is observed in schizophrenia and depression, and their respective symptoms. If this link is established, the pathophysiological framework generates a number of predictions. Although there are some overlaps between the symptoms of schizophrenia and depression, we predict that differences in symptoms might be explained by differential regional hippocampal hypermetabolism. As reviewed, there is already some evidence that these disorders target different hippocampal subregions, with schizophrenia differentially targeting CA1 and depression targeting the subiculum. We predict that the hippocampal long axis will also show this regional vulnerability. As well as explaining phenotypic differences between schizophrenia and major depressive illness, the framework might also explain phenotypic variability within the two diagnostic categories. Specifically, it might explain why some patients with depression have accompanying psychotic symptoms, and why there is variation in the degree of affective symptomatology of patients diagnosed with schizophrenia and related psychotic disorders.

Clearly, for nearly all of the disorders reviewed here, the hippocampal formation is not the only brain area that is affected. However, by mapping patterns of vulnerability within the hippocampal formation and determining whether vulnerable subregions are hypo- or hypermetabolic, a basic assumption of the framework is that this information can be exploited to clarify pathogenesis. Showing that two diseases target different subregions would provide compelling evidence that they are mediated by separate processes. For example, there has been an ongoing debate about whether Alzheimer's disease and ageing overlap mechanistically. The observed anatomical dissociation — with Alzheimer's disease differentially targeting the entorhinal cortex and ageing differentially targeting the dentate gyrus with relative sparing of the entorhinal cortex — suggests that Alzheimer's disease and ageing have distinct aetiologies.

More importantly, if a pattern of vulnerability is established, it can be used experimentally to isolate cellular and molecular mechanisms of disease. For example, using gene-expression profiling, a study relied on the differential pattern of hippocampal dysfunction in Alzheimer's disease to isolate deficiencies in molecules related to membrane sorting and trafficking in those subregions that are more affected in Alzheimer's disease 140 . Studies have confirmed that these intracellular pathways contribute to the pathogenesis of the disease 141 , leading to a general cell biological hypothesis of late-onset Alzheimer's disease 142 .

These studies in Alzheimer's disease show the framework's utility. As long as post-mortem samples can be accessed for a given disease, molecular correlates of regional vulnerability and resistance can be identified. Even if post-mortem samples are unavailable, pinpointing a hippocampal subregion that is differentially vulnerable to a given disorder can provide clues regarding pathogenesis. For example, the molecular map of the hippocampal formation shows differential expression of glucocorticoid receptors in the CA3 (REFS 143 , 144 ), which may link this subregion to PTSD. Indeed, previous rodent studies have found that both acute and chronic stress differentially target the CA3 subregion 143 – 149 . Interestingly, recent studies in rodents suggest that the effects of stress-induced glucocorticoid release is greatest in the anterior (or ventral) hippocampus 150 . Similarly, when the dentate gyrus is implicated in a disorder, a potential link of the disease to adult neurogenesis — a feature that is unique to this subregion 151 , 152 — must be considered. One straightforward possibility is that a reduction in neurogenesis underlies hippocampal dysfunction. Indeed, age-related reductions in neurogenesis have been observed in rodents 153 , and recent studies have shown that blocking neurogenesis in mice causes defects in pattern separation 48 , whereas increasing neurogenesis enhances pattern separation 154 . Alternatively, neurogenesis during development — which persists longest in the dentate gyrus compared to other subregions — can ‘imprint’ the expression of molecules that mediate transcriptional regulation. This form of gene-expression imprinting has been documented 155 , and some studies suggest that the dentate gyrus is differentially engaged in histone modification and other epigenetic mechanisms important for the regulation of transcription.

Interestingly, a range of high-resolution fMRI studies in humans, non-human primates and rodents have shown that high levels of blood glucose causes metabolic defects selectively in the dentate gyrus 2 . An increase in post-prandial blood glucose (owing to age-related insulin resistance) is observed in ageing humans and other mammals 156 , 157 . Thus, an age-related increase in blood glucose might account for why dentate gyrus dysfunction is observed with ageing across species (as reviewed above). These observations suggest that manipulations that improve glucose homeostasis might reduce or prevent age-related memory decline. Indeed, physical exercise is one manipulation that improves glucose homeostasis 158 , differentially increases dentate gyrus basal metabolism 159 and brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) expression 160 , and ameliorates age-related atrophy measured in the whole hippocampus 161 .

The occurrence of hippocampal hypermetabolism offers a separate set of clues about underlying mechanisms. For example, studies have suggested that in schizophrenia there might be an abnormal elevation in synaptic glutamate levels 162 , 163 , and therefore tonic stimulation of AMPA receptors might act as a source of hyper-metabolism. The loss of CA3 GABAergic interneurons in patients with schizophrenia 164 could cause hyperactivity in conjunction with increased synaptic glutamate release and, based on hippocampal circuit properties, this effect has been proposed to occur most prominently in the CA1 subregion 164 . Of course, many molecules regulate synaptic glutamate and some, like glutaminase, have been genetically 165 , 166 and functionally 167 implicated in schizophrenia. However, future studies are required to establish whether molecules that regulate glutamate metabolism are differentially altered in CA1 of patients with schizophrenia.

In the case of depression, mechanistic insight is provided by the fact that, when effective, anti-depressants suppress hippocampal hypermetabolism 91 . Serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) can, by increasing synaptic serotonin levels and thereby stimulating specific serotonin receptors, suppress hippocampal synaptic activity, including in the subiculum 168 , and has recently been shown to suppress an fMRI correlate of hippocampal metabolism 169 . Moreover, in vivo radioligand and postmortem studies have suggested that in depression there might be a deficiency in hippocampal serotonin receptors 170 , which could contribute to hypermetabolism. An alternative mechanism by which SSRIs might suppress hippocampal hypermetabolism is suggested by an intriguing finding showing that a reduction in dentate gyrus neurogenesis causes an increase in spontaneous synchronized activity 171 . Newly born neurons in the den-tate gyrus seem, therefore, to have an inhibitory effect on the hippocampal circuit. Although recent studies suggest that increasing neurogenesis per se does not have antidepressant effects 154 , studies nevertheless show that the effect of SSRIs are mediated in part by enhancing neurogenesis 172 . Finally, very low doses of the NMDA receptor antagonist ketamine can be rapidly effective in depression, and a recent study showed that, among its many effects, low-dose ketamine reduces spontaneous hippocampal activity 173 .

## Conclusions
The proposed pathophysiological framework of hippocampal dysfunction explains, on the one hand, how alterations in single brain structure can lead to phenotypic diversity, and on the other hand, how hippocampal dysfunction can be caused by a range of mechanistically distinct disorders. As its core feature, the framework is guided by the awareness that the hippocampal formation is not a singular structure; the hippocampal formation is a complex circuit that is functionally and molecularly segregated over its longitudinal and transverse axes.

The functional anatomy of the hippocampal circuit can explain how diseases manifest non-overlapping symptoms by differentially targeting specific sites within the circuit. Moreover, the framework informs recent theories about the computational operations performed by individual hippocampal subregions. It supports the view that the function historically assigned to the hippocampal circuit should be broadened, from an exclusive focus on memory to include affect, personality and other complex behaviours. As reviewed, the molecular anatomy of the hippocampal circuit and the unique cellular features of individual subregions provide a general principle for why the hippocampal formation is vulnerable to a broad range of mechanistically distinct disorders.

As we have emphasized, many specific questions about phenotypic features that distinguish each disorder, and the manner in which hippocampal dysfunction is causally linked to these phenotypes, remain undetermined. Moreover, although in some cases clues have emerged, the full complement of pathogenic mechanisms underlying hippocampal dysfunction have not yet been isolated. Just as advances in functional and structural MRI have generated findings that form the basis of the framework, newer technological innovation promises to address these outstanding issues. With higher field strength scanners, it will be possible, for example, to visualize divisions within the entorhinal cortex 174 and other hippocampal subregions, and magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) could be used to pinpoint putative glutamate abnormalities 175 in CA1 or neurogenesis defects in the dentate gyrus 176 . Higher resolution and better signal-to-noise ratios will accelerate the development of ‘molecular imaging’, with the promise of visualizing receptors and other molecular abnormalities that are thought to be pathogenic in specific diseases. Additionally, a new crop of technologies that are designed to map patterns of connectivity — including DTI, resting-state functional connectivity MRI 177 and manganese-enhanced MRI 178 — are already available. These technologies are well suited to further clarify patterns of connectivity within the hippocampal circuit, to map how the hippocampal long axis differentially interconnects with other brain areas, and to understand how disease and ageing affect the hippocampal circuit and the larger brain networks to which the hippocampal circuit belongs. Lastly, all of these imaging technologies, both old and new, can be used to longitudinally follow large number of subjects, tracking how ageing and disease spreads over the hippocampal circuit.

By providing a basis for better understanding hippocampal dysfunction in ageing and disease, the framework proposed in this Review will help to guide future studies, with the ultimate goal of identifying pathogenic mechanisms and of developing effective interventions for some of the most common disorders of the brain.