# Title
Systems biology and gene networks in neurodevelopmental and neurodegenerative disorders

# Abstract
Genetic and genomic approaches have implicated hundreds of genetic loci in neurodevelopmental disorders and neurodegeneration, but mechanistic understanding continues to lag behind the pace of gene discovery. Understanding the role of specific genetic variants in the brain involves dissecting a functional hierarchy that encompasses molecular pathways, diverse cell types, neural circuits and, ultimately, cognition and behaviour. With a focus on transcriptomics, this Review discusses how high-throughput molecular, integrative and network approaches inform disease biology by placing human genetics in a molecular systems and neurobiological context. We provide a framework for interpreting network biology studies and leveraging big genomics data sets in neurobiology.

## Network biology and transcriptomics in the brain
Despite challenges in studying the CNS, dozens of informative transcriptional analyses of neurodevelopmental and neurodegenerative disorders have been carried out in the human brain. A major challenge, which has mostly been surmounted at the theoretical level and which now requires reduction to practice, has been measuring and identifying which genes are altered in disease in specific cells, circuits and regions. Differential gene expression analysis (DGE analysis) addresses this issue, albeit one gene at a time, but does not take into account the relationships between genes. This leads to additional challenges, including the interpretation of long lists of differentially expressed genes and integration of DGE sets with other data. Network methods ( BOX 2 ) relate genes to each other using the measured or predicted relationships between them 4 and provide an essential organizing framework that places each gene in the context of its molecular system. Gene network methods are now being applied to integrate genetics with transcriptomics, epigenomics and proteomics to identify causal molecular drivers of cellular, circuit-level and brain-wide pathology in disease. We review the principles of network analysis below and also delve into applications of molecular systems and integrative network approaches in neuropsychiatric and neurodegenerative disease.

Molecular profiling data can be modelled as a network in which molecules or gene products are nodes and their functional relationships with each other are edges. Gene network analysis can be summarized in five basic steps.

Seeded (prior-based) networks have nodes that are selected using prior knowledge, such as genetic variants that are associated with a disorder, and unseeded (genome-wide) networks use all available measurements from the genome.

In order to define edges, studies need to include one or more of the following: experimentally observed pairwise statistical relationships 25 , 212 , 213 evaluating shared patterns of molecular levels across experiments, such as co-expression; experimentally observed or literature-curated physical interactions, such as protein interactions from immunoprecipitation and yeast two-hybrid (Y2H) experiments; or computationally predicted relationships, such as transcription factor binding based on DNA motifs. Notably, edges are susceptible to ascertainment biases 52 , 214 , 215 and confounding factors that can induce spurious relationships 178 ( FIG. 2b ).

Modules are identified from an adjacency matrix to simplify biological relationships at a higher-order level, identifying interacting or highly correlated gene products ( FIG. 2c ). Assessing node connectivity or position within the module can identify hubs and enables the comparison of changes between health and disease at the module level.

There are several common approaches to annotate modules. External measures of gene importance (such as cell type specificity or genome-wide association study (GWAS) signals) can be related to module membership, intra-modular connectivity or network-wide gene connectivity. Module summary or hub gene measurements, such as module eigengenes or average expression levels, can be associated with biological traits. Any differential gene expression (DGE) test that can be applied at a single-gene level can be applied to module-level summaries, such as eigengenes. Module-level association reduces the problem of multiple comparisons, as there are far fewer modules than genes in a network. The preservation or changes in network connectivity for specific genes or modules can be assessed between health and disease. Data can be integrated at the edge level or the module level across biological levels, such as different cell types or brain regions, or different regulatory levels, such as gene expression and ChIP–seq signals.

The crucial issue of reproducibility is addressed by validating network observations in independent data or experiments ( BOX 3 ; TABLE 1 ). Biological validation may involve experimental testing of mechanistic predictions.

Randomize or balance sample preparation and data collection over all known factors to reduce confounding variation from batch effects, which can introduce spurious correlations. For RNA-seq, we recommend barcoding and multiplexing samples (over eight per lane) to reduce batch effects 216 .

Evaluate the contribution of both biological and technical factors via unsupervised methods such as principal component analysis 178 and apply appropriate methods to remove unwanted variation from the data 181 , 217 .

RNA-seq studies with degraded RNA (RNA integrity number <9; essentially all post-mortem studies) should use ribosomal RNA depletion library preparation 218 . Sequencing samples with a read length of 50 bp with 10 million unique reads (20 million paired-end reads) will detect most highly expressed genes. Deeper sequencing and longer read lengths may be required to accurately and systematically detect noncoding RNAs, splicing or novel features, and pilot experiments are recommended for these scenarios.

In most experiments, biological variability is greater than technical variability, so biological replicates are of greater value than technical replicates 174 , 175 , 219 .

For well-controlled experiments with expected changes of >twofold in many genes, three or more independent samples per condition are recommended 175 , 219 . For post-mortem samples, in which the detection of lower-fold changes may be important and variation may be greater owing to clinical heterogeneity and technical factors, at least 15 case and 15 control samples are recommended in an initial cohort.

Appropriately transformed and normalized sequencing data can be treated similarly to microarray data as far as statistical modelling and multiple corrections are concerned 175 , 220 . For differential gene expression (DGE), RNA-seq studies should observe existing analytical and statistical guidelines for microarrays 221 and, if possible, should carry out pilot experiments to estimate power 222 .

The power of network analysis is dependent on similar factors to DGE but is also dependent on the network features of interest. At currently available sample sizes, networks are most reproducible at a module level 35 , 38 , 39 , then at the hub gene level 41 , 223 and, last, at the level of precise gene connectivity rankings or precise module memberships of genes 40 , 49 .

To obtain module-level reproducibility, 20 independent samples are usually sufficient 40 , but systematic and accurate reconstruction of specific edges, particularly for systematic regulatory relationship discovery, may require hundreds of samples 49 . For studies comparing conditions, we recommend a minimum of 20 samples per condition. More samples may be necessary if many additional factors vary; for example, age, sex and different brain regions.

Given the large number of parameters in network analysis, there is no ‘one-size fits all’ solution. The most rigorous approach is to apply the empirical reproducibility criteria discussed below.

Apply permutation analyses to ensure that gene network modules are significantly co-expressed (interconnected).

To reduce over-fitting and to improve reproducibility, select the outcome of interest (fold change for each gene and gene membership in a module) and apply cross-validation or the bootstrap method 224 .

Demonstrating reproducibility of major findings (for example, module definitions, top DGE genes and changes in gene network position between conditions) is the most convincing form of validation of a particular analysis. Replication involves identifying the outcome of interest, applying the same analysis as in the original study but to independent data, and demonstrating statistical replication of the same finding.

Generate hypotheses from the DGE and/or network analyses and test them bioinformatically or with wet-laboratory experiments to demonstrate predictive biological value.

To allow other researchers to examine the data sets, raw data should be deposited in a public database (such as GEO, SRA or dbGaP).

To allow for a comparison of analysis methods, always publish clear and usable code along with the publication reporting this analysis.

For gene expression studies, co-expression network analysis leverages the fact that gene expression reflects the state of the cellular or tissue system that is being analysed 25 . A major advantage of network analysis over DGE analysis is that it can identify multiple levels of molecular organization within the hierarchy of brain region, cell type, organelle and molecular pathways using only transcriptional data, and can thus enable integration with other information, such as known pathway annotations, protein interactions and other molecular profiling data 11 , 12 , 26 , 27 ( BOX 1 ; FIG. 2a ). Furthermore, when thousands of genes might be differential between conditions, network analysis can subdivide changes into smaller, more biologically coherent sets of modules for further experimental analyses.

Networks organize genome-wide molecular data by modelling molecules as nodes (typically genes or gene products) and the relationships between nodes as edges. Edges are not necessarily physical interactions — they may also reflect statistical similarity (for example, correlation or mutual information), computational inference or combinations of these edge types ( FIG. 2b ). Edges define the connectivity of nodes to each other in a network, and this connectivity can be used to organize and analyse the nodes. Many biological networks have a hierarchical structure such that their nodes can be organized into a relatively small collection of highly interconnected modules 4 , 28 , 29 ( FIG. 2c ). Inter-modular connectivity reflects a higher-order structure of biological relationships in a gene network, and intra-modular connectivity can identify which genes are biological hubs within modules. In co-expression networks, hubs are highly connected genes; being a hub is an indication of the importance of a gene in the process of interest. Hubs can be key molecular drivers, such as transcriptional regulators that drive co-expression 30 , 31 , or they may annotate a module by reflecting the predominant biological role of the module. For example, when evaluating co-expression across brain regions, hubs in modules that are associated with specific regions, such as the cerebellum, are usually markers for predominant cell types, such as granule cells 11 , 12 , 26 , 32 .

Modularity is very useful, and although it provides a general organizing principle in biology, it need not be present in all constructed networks, and network biology provides many module-free analytical approaches; for example, nodes can be organized in relation to each other by ranking direct and indirect connectivity. If two gene products share an edge, they are said to be neighbours in the network; the more highly interconnected, the closer the neighbours. Thus, gene products that are involved in an unknown cell type or biological process can be annotated on the basis of their proximity to marker genes of known function (‘guilt by association’) 26 , 33 , 34 . Additionally, both modularity and connectivity rankings can be compared between studies to assess whether they are preserved 35 , and how a module or the position of specific genes within a module change in health and disease can be evaluated to prioritize those that show the most significant changes for further evaluation 35 – 37 .

The most common workflow in gene co-expression network analysis in neuroscience involves the construction of co-expression relationships from microarray or RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) data, identifying modules and then annotating modules on the basis of the known function of module hubs, enrichment for gene sets and module-level association with biological factors such as disease ( FIG. 2a ). Discussion of the various options and the technical merits of specific network approaches is beyond the scope of this Review 38 – 41 . Comparisons among methods have indicated several important points: weighted networks are more reproducible and powerful than binary networks 42 ; signed networks are more predictive of protein interactions and shared pathway relationships than unsigned networks 38 , 42 , 43 ; weighted networks constructed with the topological overlap of correlation (for example, by weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA) 42 , 44 ) have similar sensitivity and specificity for detecting true network structure for experiments involving monotonic relationships as do networks constructed with nonlinear association measures such as mutual information (for example, by the Algorithm for the Reconstruction of Accurate Cellular Networks (ARACNE) 45 ) 38 , 39 ; and edge relationships using mutual information or other association measures might be necessary to accurately detect modules in time-series data, which can be non-monotonic 46 – 48 . Differential co-expression or connectivity methods 36 , 37 are additional means for determining gene connectivity changes between conditions and can identify disruption or gain of function in pathways.

We provide guidelines in BOX 3 to aid co-expression network reproducibility regardless of the method used. Importantly, the replication of major conclusions in independent data and experimental validation lend the greatest confidence to a network analysis. There is a need for studies that rigorously compare network analysis in human CNS transcriptome data using experimental validation as a gold standard, similar to what has been done in the Dialogue on Reverse Engineering Assessment and Methods (DREAM) regulatory network inference challenge 49 . The DREAM challenge identified that the integration of multiple network methods yields the most robust regulatory relationship predictions 49 . This leveraged the availability of hundreds of gene expression profiles in single-cell organisms (bacteria and yeast) and compared regulatory predictions between methods with gold standard experimental validations. Building such regulatory networks in complex tissues such as the CNS is a step beyond current co-expression networks in the brain. Large amounts of data, ideally from homogeneous cellular populations, are necessary to systematically and accurately predict gene regulatory relationships in network studies.

There are many databases that aggregate experiments to construct genome-wide data sets that can be utilized for network construction ( TABLE 1 ). Gene networks that are built on data that contain even a small fraction of literature-curated components can contain substantial bias. Furthermore, when data are from non-neuronal tissue, the database may contain relationships not found in neural tissues ( TABLE 1 ). Although reliant on data from non-neuronal tissue, pathway databases such as the Gene Ontology (GO 50 ), the Kyoto Encyclopaedia of Genes and Genome Elements (KEGG 51 ), Ingenuity Pathway Analyses and MetaCore are valuable for evaluating specific genes and pathways. However, networks with edges that are derived from shared pathway membership can reflect cellular states that might not be found in the CNS, and they will certainly lack many important CNS-specific relationships. In a worst-case scenario, hubs in these networks may be the most studied genes in other areas of biology, and therefore may not reflect neurobiological relevance. It is therefore important to distinguish between networks that are constructed using edges from pathway databases and those using edges derived from tissue-specific primary molecular profiling experiments.

Protein–protein interaction (PPI) databases, which compile known physical interactions between proteins, are another example of literature-curated data. PPI experiments may focus on a few proteins and evaluate interactions in a tissue-specific manner using co-immunoprecipitation followed by proteomics. Alternatively, most genome-wide PPI experiments use methods such as yeast two-hybrid (Y2H) screens or tandem affinity purification and are cell type agnostic. The genome-wide approaches yield many more interactions, so most databases typically combine both target-focused and genome-wide experiments 52 . Similar to pathway databases, these PPI data sets are biased to highly studied gene categories (for example, those implicated in cancer biology) and are still generally incomplete 2 , 53 ( TABLE 1 ). A particularly salient example of the utility of defining tissue-relevant networks is the power obtained by using PPIs derived from cardiac tissue to identify new human loci for long QT syndrome 54 . To reduce bias and improve tissue specificity for genome-wide networks in the absence of tissue-specific PPIs, one approach is to intersect tissue-specific RNA expression or co-expression with literature-curated PPI data 55 , 56 .

These considerations also apply to other physical interaction data, including CLIP–seq, ChIP–seq and miRNA binding data, unless they come from experiments using relevant tissues 57 . Computational approaches to predict physical interactions can partly circumvent bias ( TABLE 1 ), but they do not address tissue specificity, and there may be relatively low reproducibility across different methods 58 , 59 . There is compelling evidence that using DNase hypersensitivity or ATAC-seq data to infer open chromatin, followed by combining transcription factor binding with open chromatin footprinting, can provide a powerful and comprehensive way to identify tissue-specific transcription factor regulation 60 , 61 . The increasing availability of large amounts of relevant data sets within the public domain 10 , 14 now permits the evaluation of network modules for complex regulatory relationships by combining network edges from statistical associations, time-series data, physical binding and computational predictions ( FIG. 2b ).

When combining multiple molecular levels in networks, it is important to recognize that transcriptomics, epigenomics and proteomics all query unique levels of cellular or tissue organization. For example, most proteins found only in mitochondria do not physically interact with most proteins found only in ribosomes or proteasomes, and these proteins would normally form distinct (but possibly connected) modules in PPI networks. However, in circumstances such as cellular stress or neurodegeneration, the genes encoding these organelle-specific proteins might be transcriptionally co-regulated and hence highly connected at a co-expression level. In this case, transcriptomics can provide a novel view of cellular mechanisms. In general, tissue-, time- or disease-specific data sets aid in conferring specificity to otherwise non-neuronal data. Until such data are available, we suggest beginning with genome-wide tissue-specific data such as transcriptomics, followed by combining literature-curated or non-tissue-specific evidence with gene co-expression modules.

## Neurodevelopmental disorders
Neurodevelopmental disorders are characterized by abnormal behavioural or cognitive phenotypes originating either in utero or during early postnatal life, and can be accompanied by clinical features outside the CNS. Various genetic approaches have been successful in identifying the causes of more than 1,000 Mendelian, and fewer non-Mendelian, forms of neurodevelopmental disorders: prototypical examples are intellectual disability 62 – 68 , autism spectrum disorder (ASD) 69 – 77 , epilepsy 78 , 79 and schizophrenia 80 – 82 .

As more genetic risk variants for these disorders have been discovered, studies have found remarkable pleiotropy 1 , 1 , 83 , 84 . Several rare, highly penetrant mutations in evolutionarily constrained fetal brain-expressed genes are associated with ASD, schizophrenia and intellectual disability, as well as epilepsy 83 , 85 – 87 . We frame this issue using the concept of developmental canalization 88 , whereby natural selection on developmental programmes in humans has led to robustness in a range of genetic or environmental perturbations 89 , 90 : typical development occurs along a ‘track’ ( FIG. 1c ). Under this framework, the observed pleiotropy is consistent with the notion that disrupting highly evolutionarily constrained genes leads to the ‘derailment’ of typical development off this track, rather than setting the brain on a path to a specific clinically defined disorder ( FIG. 1c ). Thus, many severe mutations do not converge on one specific phenotype but instead seem to cause a range of clinical disorders 74 , 76 , 80 , 81 , 84 , 87 , 91 . This formulation leads to several important questions that can be informed by integrative genomic studies, including whether diverse genetic lesions affect similar pathways and where disease specificity emerges. We provide examples below of gene network studies that use co-expression, PPIs and integrated networks to understand ASD and schizophrenia.

ASD is a phenotypically and aetiologically heterogeneous neurodevelopmental disorder that is defined by deficits in social communication and mental flexibility, with an onset in the first few years of life 75 . More transcriptional studies of ASD post-mortem brains have been limited by the paucity of available tissue, which has made them underpowered to identify reproducible pathways with statistical rigour 92 – 95 . Nevertheless, some themes have emerged across studies, including the increased expression of immune-microglial genes and the decreased expression of synaptic genes in the cerebral cortex. The first ASD study to identify reproducible, genome-wide findings used WGCNA 42 to identify two modules, one containing upregulated genes and another containing downregulated genes that defined coherent biological processes in ASD brains 30 . This study used co-expression module eigengenes (the first principal component of the gene expression levels of each module) to identify modules associated with ASD and to ensure that they were unrelated to potential confounders such as RNA integrity, age or seizure history. This module-level association approach reduces the problem of multiple comparisons and highlights the advantages of using networks as an organizing framework 96 . The integration of genetic data with co-expression modules showed that the downregulated neuronal signalling module has a potential causal role in ASD, and that the upregulated ASD module was probably a response, which is consistent with its enrichment in microglia and astrocyte genes 30 . These results supported the findings of several previous smaller studies 92 , 93 . Synaptic and microglial modules have been replicated in ASD cortex using RNA-seq in larger independent cohorts 97 .

Schizophrenia is defined by prolonged or recurrent episodes of psychosis (characterized by hallucinations and delusions) as well as negative symptoms and deficits in cognitive function 98 . Although diagnosis is usually made in late adolescence or early adulthood, extensive evidence indicates a neurodevelopmental origin 99 . Transcriptional studies of schizophrenia have benefited from considerably larger sample sizes than those of ASD. However, patients with schizophrenia have greater comorbidity of confounders such as smoking, alcohol and substance abuse than those with ASD. Overcoming potential confounders requires careful matching of patient and control individuals and must take into account potential covariate effects when possible, as has been done in many studies 100 , 101 . Despite variable results, consistent findings across studies can be identified, including dysregulation of GABAergic signalling 102 ; downregulation of oligodendrocyte- and myelination-related genes 103 , mitochondrial function or energy metabolism 104 , and synaptic genes 105 ; and upregulation of immune and inflammatory genes 106 .

One of the first studies to put schizophrenia transcriptomics into a genome-wide co-expression network used mutual information and WGCNA 107 . This study showed that, as in ASD, the overall transcriptomic structure that is observed in control brains is intact but that a neural differentiation module that is associated with schizophrenia does not follow the normal trajectory of downregulation with age. Another study confirmed that a dysregulated neuronal differentiation module was consistently observed in schizophrenia post-mortem brains and suggested that the same pathways were involved in bipolar disorder 108 . Moreover, genome-wide association study (GWAS) signal enrichment analysis 30 found that common variants associated with schizophrenia and bipolar disorder were enriched in the neuronal differentiation module, suggesting that disorders sharing a genetic architecture 84 may also share functional transcriptional alterations: a hypothesis that warrants rigorous testing.

A shortcoming of studies using post-mortem brain tissue is that the tissue is usually obtained long after the disease-causing changes have occurred. Given that the human brain transcriptome has a reproducible structure 12 , 26 , one useful way to explore how mutations in risk genes perturb typical brain development is to map risk genes onto transcriptional networks that represent normal brain structure or development ( FIG. 1c ). The first study to do this identified co-expression modules that had cell type-specific and region-specific expression patterns using nearly 1,000 adult brain regions 12 , 109 , and identified neuronal gene-enriched modules containing ASD candidate genes and ASD GWAS signals. Moreover, this study found that genes in these modules have dynamic developmental trajectories, demonstrating a role for ASD risk genes in neural development.

The identification of genetic risk factors by whole-exome sequencing 70 – 73 and the availability of transcriptome data spanning multiple brain regions and developmental stages 13 , 17 created new opportunities to map disease risk genes onto developmental transcriptional networks. One network study defined robust co-expression modules that were reproducible in independent data and identified five developmentally regulated co-expression modules that were enriched for PPIs and ASD risk genes 27 . By comparing these genes with genes that cause intellectual disability, this study identified molecular processes that are preferentially disrupted by ASD risk genes, including transcriptional regulation, chromatin regulation and synaptic development, and it identified disruption of specific pathways, such as BAF (SWI/ SNF) complex-mediated neuronal development 30 , 110 , 111 . A complementary study identified developmental co-expression networks enriched for ASD risk genes seeded around nine genes with the highest ASD association signal from whole-exome sequencing 112 . These investigators asked if, when and where ASD genetic risk converges during brain development by evaluating seeded co-expression networks. They started with the nine ‘high-confidence’ risk genes and expanded the network using combinations of spatial and temporal expression data from post-mortem brain tissue. They identified three spatiotemporal combinations that passed stringent correction for multiple testing: frontal cortical regions during the fetal period, and thalamic and cerebellar regions from birth to 6 years of postnatal age. Interestingly, there was no pathway or PPI enrichment in these modules, probably owing to the inclusion of both positive and negative correlations when computing co-expression relationships (unsigned networks), which is a method that is less sensitive to pathway and protein interaction detection 38 , 43 .

Importantly, both of these studies found convergence for rare de novo ASD-associated mutations during early fetal and mid-fetal development, with the greatest enrichment for risk in genes found in cortical glutamatergic neurons. Thus, despite the fact that the same gene is rarely hit recurrently by rare de novo variants in ASD, this class of variation preferentially disrupts projection neurons. Notably, the genome-wide approach 27 assessed both ASD and intellectual disability genes, and further suggested that the disruption of the upper neocortical layers (layers 2–4) is related to ASD-like phenotypes and not intellectual disability. Other studies have also found that fetal cortical development and glutamatergic neurons are affected by mutations in ASD, suggesting that it is a robust finding 11 , 113 , 114 .

A seeded co-expression approach has also been used to identify risk convergence in schizophrenia, identifying fetal development of the prefrontal cortex as a point of convergence for de novo mutations 115 . This study did not extend the network to genes beyond the seed set, and it did not investigate cellular, laminar or regulatory relationships among these genes. As larger sets of risk genes are becoming available 72 , 77 , 80 , 81 , a more refined view will emerge of how mutations in ASD, schizophrenia, intellectual disability and other psychiatric disorders overlap and diverge to affect cells and circuits.

Another promising approach to identify disease-associated networks is to experimentally construct a seed-based network for a candidate regulatory molecule. Using CLIP–seq, investigators identified the RNA binding targets of the translational regulator fragile X mental retardation protein (FMRP) 116 , and a subsequent analysis found that these targets are highly enriched for de novo mutations in ASD 72 . Both genome-wide 27 and seeded 114 co-expression network analysis further connected FMRP targets with multiple forms of ASD genetic risk, including copy number variations (CNVs) 114 . Additionally, whole-exome sequencing studies of other neurodevelopmental disorders have found enrichment for FMRP targets in rare mutations in schizophrenia 81 , intellectual disability 68 and epilepsy 78 . As many FMRP targets are highly conserved and are under purifying selection 72 , 87 , 117 , FMRP-related activity-dependent regulation during fetal brain development might be particularly vulnerable to genetic perturbations, with severe mutations resulting in disruption of developmental canalization.

At the transcriptional regulation level, ChIP–seq in induced pluripotent stem cell-derived neurons has been used to define the network of genes regulated by chromodomain helicase DNA-binding protein 8 ( CHD8 ) 118 , which is the gene most frequently affected by ASD-associated rare de novo variation 72 , 119 – 121 . Integration of ChIP–seq, CHD8 knockdown and gene co-expression suggested that CHD8 directly regulates co-expression modules that are enriched for rare de novo mutations and genes found in the proliferating layers of the fetal cortex 27 . Another study applied a similar approach but evaluated CHD8 targets in the fetal brain in vivo 57 . This study identified stronger enrichment for ASD mutations, suggesting that ChIP–seq in the human brain at the right time point identifies interactions that are more disease relevant 57 . Given the emerging role of fetal brain-expressed transcriptional and chromatin regulators in ASD 27 , 77 , 122 , integrating ChIP–seq of other transcriptional regulators with developmental co-expression networks may help to elucidate a shared, evolutionarily constrained regulatory network that is susceptible to disruption in brain development.

Genetic investigations in ASD have constructed seed-based networks with literature-curated PPIs to identify the convergence of ASD risk genes 71 , 73 . This approach was applied to identify a highly interconnected PPI subnetwork among rare de novo variants in ASD 71 . Genes in this subnetwork were evaluated in a larger cohort in a targeted sequencing study 120 , which identified more risk variants compared with chance and demonstrated that PPI connectivity can be a predictor of ASD risk mutations. However, the biases inherent to literature-curated data and the lack of tissue specificity in these PPI networks limit the identification of novel pathways or circuits with this approach ( TABLE 1 ).

Recently, one study used global literature-curated PPI interactions in a genome-wide network analysis to identify modules that are enriched for ASD-associated genes 123 . This identified a PPI module that is enriched for genes related to synaptic function and weakly enriched for mutations from individuals with ASD. Integration with transcriptomics annotated the module as highly expressed in oligodendrocytes and the corpus callosum, demonstrating that tissue-specific data are essential for a neurobiological interpretation of PPI modules 123 . Given the biases inherent to global PPIs discussed above and in TABLE 1 , these findings warrant replication with new PPI data. Understanding why these relationships are detected at the PPI level but not at the co-expression level will be valuable.

To evaluate whether ASD risk genes interact at the protein level in an unbiased manner, Sakai and colleagues 124 carried out a Y2H screen of 35 syndromic or candidate ASD genes and identified many novel PPIs. This study was the first of its kind in neurodevelopmental disorders and showed that the PPI network seeded around these 35 genes was indeed highly interconnected. Another Y2H study assessed a larger seed set of ASD candidate genes that corresponded to spliced isoforms identified by whole-brain RNA-seq 125 , hypothesizing that isoform-level PPIs would allow for the discovery of tissue-specific PPI networks 126 . The genes in the most interconnected component of the PPI network formed a module that was modestly enriched for gene co-expression, gene co-regulation and known ASD genes. These results further demonstrated convergence among known disease-relevant genes at the PPI level and also demonstrated that evaluating tissue-specific isoforms can be used to identify novel interactions. Both of these PPI studies used state-of-the-art quality control and validation, and identified many novel interactions. However, even with knowledge of isoform-specific interactions, the tissue environment for interaction cannot be efficiently recapitulated with current PPI approaches at a genome-wide scale ( TABLE 1 ). This, and other recent work studying cardiac tissue 54 , highlights how tissue-specific molecular data improve PPI analyses to identify or prioritize genetic variants that specifically function in that tissue, in this case causing cardiac arrhythmia.

The idea that multiple lines of evidence may increase the power to detect disease-relevant interactions has motivated the integration of literature-curated, molecular and genetic evidence to support specific genes or pathways. The Network-Based Analysis of Genes (NETBAG) 127 approach combines multiple forms of literature-curated data using an integrated network approach that has been demonstrated to be effective for predicting gene essentiality in yeast 128 . The goal of NETBAG is to construct a network in which highly interconnected genes are likely to participate in a similar phenotype. Edges in NETBAG are predominantly derived from multiple PPI databases, GO 50 and KEGG 51 , which are all literature-curated databases, and thus NETBAG is susceptible to the biases discussed above. The first study with NETBAG evaluated CNV-hit genes implicated in ASD and found a highly interconnected module related to synaptic function 129 . Furthermore, genes in CNVs from females contributed more to the module connectivity than those from males, suggesting that females are affected by more severe genetic hits in ASD, an observation that has been replicated in exome-sequencing studies 76 , 117 . Another approach 130 has evaluated CNV duplications in addition to CNV deletions and also found an interconnected PPI network that was enriched for proteins involved in synaptic transmission, validating the observation that pathogenic CNVs affect similar gene networks 127 . An extension of the NETBAG approach (dubbed NETBAG+) has also been applied to simultaneously evaluate large sets of single-nucleotide variants (SNVs) and CNVs in schizophrenia 131 and ASD 132 , confirming the convergence of disease genes onto shared pathways.

An exciting approach is to simultaneously integrate PPIs, co-expression and mutational burden in neurodevelopmental disorders, as has been done by Merging Affected Genes into Integrated networks (MAGI 133 ). This approach begins with mutation-affected genes in their known pathways and then adds genes to these ‘seed pathways’ on the basis of high co-expression or PPI connectivity. The extent to which genes are added to make a module is determined by an objective function that maximizes pathogenic mutations from cases compared with controls in the module. MAGI identified modules containing functionally related genes enriched for deleterious mutations in ASD, many of which are under strong purifying selection, and are also found in epilepsy, schizophrenia and intellectual disability 133 .

## Neurodegenerative disease
Neurodegenerative diseases are characterized by a progressive loss of neural tissue that results in a decline in cognitive and behavioural function. Many of these diseases have known causes that involve mutations in ubiquitously expressed proteins 134 , but they follow stereotyped patterns of degeneration that selectively affect certain cell subsets more severely, resulting in disease-specific spatial and temporal patterns of degeneration 135 – 137 ( BOX 1 ). Neuropathological investigations have identified protein-centric mechanisms that might be involved in disease pathogenesis, but causal mechanisms are difficult to pinpoint, as post-mortem samples reflect the consequence of years of ageing and disease progression. Important disease-associated molecular changes can be confounded by environmental and clinical factors. Additionally, although positional cloning has identified genes and pathways that are involved in many neurodegenerative diseases, pathological mechanisms, modulators of pathogenesis and disease biomarkers have remained elusive, suggesting that genome-wide approaches are needed. Transcriptional and PPI network studies have recently identified many new insights into these diseases. Below, we focus on representative transcriptomic studies of two genetically complex diseases (Alzheimer disease and frontotemporal dementia (FTD)) and PPI studies of two diseases for which causal genes are well defined (Huntington disease and inherited ataxia), but for which disease mechanisms are still poorly understood.

The major challenge in Alzheimer disease and FTD transcriptomics has been the identification of changes that are independent of alterations in cell type proportions, which accompany cell death and inflammation. Three major study design principles have been used to overcome this issue: transcriptomes in differentially vulnerable brain regions or cellular populations can be compared to identify vulnerable or protected pathways 138 , 139 ( BOX 1 ); preclinical changes in at-risk individuals with a milder disease presentation can identify genes and pathways that might lead to disease 140 ; and cell type-specific markers can be used in combination with bioin-formatic analyses to account for the effect of changes in cell proportion on the overall transcriptome 141 , 142 .

Multiple transcriptomic studies of Alzheimer disease have been carried out in the human brain at varying spatial resolutions 143 . Large studies using quantitative metrics of severity 140 and differentially vulnerable regions 144 have identified pathway-level changes in transcriptional regulation, apoptosis, cell proliferation, energy metabolism and synaptic transmission. One particularly powerful approach involved the use of the pattern of regional vulnerability to guide a microarray study that identified a defect in the retromer complex, which is responsible for endosome-mediated recycling of membrane proteins 145 . The involvement of this pathway in Alzheimer disease was experimentally validated 146 . The first large transcriptomic study (involving 188 controls and 176 individuals with Alzheimer disease) 147 connected genetic variation to expression changes by using expression quantitative trait locus analysis (eQTL analysis) in controls and Alzheimer disease, and further supported the pathway-level findings related to transcriptional regulation and energy metabolism in Alzheimer disease 140 , 148 . Integration of eQTLs can identify causality in transcriptomic studies in the context of Alzheimer disease risk, adding a crucial mechanistic element to studies of post-mortem gene expression.

In FTD, transcriptional signatures related to differential regional vulnerability have helped to identify modulators of neurodegeneration. The first of two well-powered studies that applied this approach carried out transcriptomic analysis in a mouse model of FTD, identifying the gene Npepps 138 . Cross-species analyses in flies and humans confirmed the expression pattern and neuroprotective effect of NPEPPS 138 . The second study 139 compared post-mortem tissue from patients with FTD harbouring dominant mutations in the pro-granulin ( GRN ) gene, patients who had FTD but who did not have a known family history or mutations, and control individuals. This study also leveraged regional vulnerability by comparing transcriptome profiles in the frontal cortex, hippocampus and cerebellum, identifying a diminishing hierarchy of susceptibility to FTD. The findings demonstrated that GRN- positive individuals were a transcriptomically distinct group from those with sporadic FTD 139 . Both of these studies in FTD demonstrate the value of using selective vulnerability and differential genetic risk in study design.

Most early post-mortem studies from individuals with Alzheimer disease or FTD generated long gene lists and were followed by analysis of GO or KEGG pathway enrichment 139 , 140 , 147 . In an early network study, Miller and colleagues 149 applied network analysis to compare the transcriptome in normal ageing and Alzheimer disease, finding many shared features that were downregulated in Alzheimer disease and normal human ageing 149 . They subsequently 150 incorporated more than 1,000 microarrays from mouse models of Alzheimer disease and human patients with Alzheimer disease from public databases to reproduce and extend these results, identifying additional co-expression modules that are related to mitochondrial dysfunction and synaptic plasticity. This work also found major differences in dementia susceptibility genes between humans and mice, potentially identifying why some mouse models might not recapitulate human neuropathology. Another study used similar methods to identify overlap in transcriptional networks between vascular disease (a major risk factor for dementia) and Alzheimer disease, identifying potential molecular mechanisms that might underlie their co-occurrence 151 . Forabosco and colleagues 152 used network analysis to explore the function of TREM2 (triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells 2), an Alzheimer disease risk gene, suggesting a role for microglial function and further implicating neuroinflammation in Alzheimer disease. In FTD, two studies re-analysed published transcriptome data 139 to discover a role for WNT signalling in GRN -mediated FTD 153 , 154 . Both involved extensive bioinformatic analyses of expression data from in vitro neural progenitor models and identified transcriptomic changes shared across the post-mortem human brain, human neural cell lines and the mouse brain. Experimental validation of predictions from these networks showed that this cross-species approach can identify consistent, high-confidence perturbations in neurodegenerative disease 46 , 153 . Additionally, the use of previously published human data in many of these studies highlights the value of policies supporting data sharing, especially from patient cohorts. Finally, studies of the regulatory networks and targets of specific miRNAs such as miR-339-5p in dementia are in their early stages 155 – 157 but promise to reveal novel regulators of neurodegeneration.

Although transcriptomic studies have furthered our understanding of disease mechanisms beyond neuropathology and single genes, the effects of cell type loss have not been completely accounted for in most studies. Purifying cell populations or carrying out transcriptional analyses on single cells 158 – 163 can identify important changes that are not apparent in whole-tissue transcriptomes 141 , 142 . Combining bioinformatics approaches with single-cell sequencing will increase the resolution at which regional vulnerability can be assessed and will enhance the ability of gene co-expression networks to identify key changes associated with dementia.

The causal mutations for Huntington disease and many inherited ataxias have been known for more than a decade, and thus the focus of molecular investigations has been on understanding disease mechanisms and modifiers. Lim and colleagues 164 used a seed-based approach based on a Y2H screen to identify interactors of the protein products of multiple causal and candidate genes in inherited ataxias. Analysis of the resultant PPI network identified an interconnected network of proteins related to inherited ataxias. Importantly, interactors in the network were potential modifiers of disease progression, and, in subsequent work, gain of function mediated by a newly identified protein complex was found to mediate disease pathogenesis 165 . This Y2H approach has also been used to identify potential modulators of Huntington disease 166 , in which it is thought that inter-actors of huntingtin (the causally mutated pathological protein) might modulate disease severity. Interestingly, in vivo PPI screening by large-scale co-immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry provided tissue- and time-specific information that was not found by Y2H studies 167 . WGCNA identified spatially and temporally specific modules associated with mutant Htt (which encodes huntingtin); and proteins with high intra-modular connectivity (hub proteins) modulated neurodegeneration in flies. This work further emphasizes the importance of considering tissue context in the studies examining disease-relevant protein associations.

The most ambitious and exciting goal in systems biology is to elucidate the functional genetic architecture of diseases by systematically identifying causal effects using genome-wide variation to disambiguate primary and secondary changes that occur in disease 168 , 169 . A recent study shows that this goal is possible in the CNS by using genetic variation as a causal anchor to define genetically driven network-level changes in Alzheimer disease and to provide experimental validation for network predictions 170 . Zhang and colleagues 170 applied WGCNA to hundreds of post-mortem brain samples from individuals with Alzheimer disease, other neurodegenerative diseases and controls. They showed that multiple transcriptional modules were remodelled in Alzheimer disease: gain of connectivity was observed in immune and neurogenesis pathways, and loss of connectivity was predominant in pathways related to GABA signalling and myelination. An eQTL analysis followed by module-level genetic signal enrichment identified several modules in which genetic association signals were enriched. Given that gene expression changes are caused by genetic variation, this suggested these modules were causally involved 171 . The researchers then applied Bayesian network analysis to evaluate causal relationships in an Alzheimer disease-related microglial module, implicating TYROBP (TYRO protein tyrosine kinase-binding protein) as a regulatory hub. The role of Tyrobp was experimentally validated in mice 170 , showing that network structure is predictive, as had previously been demonstrated with co-expression networks 32 . Overall, integrating genetics with co-expression networks using large sample sizes (with a minimum of 100 cases and controls) and establishing causality by evaluating genotype–phenotype relationships and eQTL is very promising.

## Specificity and convergence across CNS disorders
Many of the most influential studies using gene networks to probe neuropsychiatric disease mechanisms integrate multiple data types (for example, RNA expression, GWAS signals and PPI) or data sets (for example, human post-mortem, mouse and in vitro ), emphasizing the value of publicly available data sets. The further availability of raw molecular profiling data with necessary metadata amplifies the value of individual studies. In addition to generating new hypotheses, molecular systems approaches integrating data from diverse studies can reveal unexpected and distinct relationships that are common to different CNS disorders. FIGURE 3 describes an example of a network-based meta-analysis of brain transcriptional profiles from publicly available data in ASD, schizophrenia and Alzheimer disease, which identifies shared and distinct biological processes across disorders. Several modules are shared by two of the three disorders, including the red module (ASD and schizophrenia), which contains voltage-gated calcium channels, and the green module (ASD and Alzheimer disease), which contains microglial markers ( FIG. 3b–d ). This demonstrates how cross-disorder analyses can systematically reveal shared and distinct biological processes among disorders, even when the data are from different studies (see Supplementary information S1 (box) ). It will be fruitful to combine more CNS disorders and diseases and to integrate GWASs and rare mutations to identify which variants affect gene expression across diagnostic boundaries and which are more specific. Prioritizing the disease-specific genes for further investigation may also aid in clarifying the molecular processes that lead to behavioural and cognitive alterations that are specific to a particular disease.

## Guidelines for transcriptomic and network studies
Given the promise of molecular systems and integrative network approaches, it is perhaps surprising that there are few universally agreed on metrics, power analysis tools or methodological comparisons to guide experimental design, execution and analysis, such as there are for genetic association studies 172 . For DGE and network analysis, there are many studies with guidelines that are based on theoretical models and empirical assessments 40 , 173 – 176 , but most studies use data from experiments that do not have the spatial, temporal or disease-relevant complexities that occur in studies of the CNS or post-mortem tissue. There is no experimental design that suits all aims, but we suggest criteria for initial experimental design, ensuring reproducibility and improving biological interpretability for transcriptomic analyses in BOX 3 .

In general, it is helpful to think of all variation in gene expression or other molecular profiling data as a consequence of technical, biological and unmeasured factors 177 , rather than assuming that differences are due to experimental interventions or disease status 41 . Optimal methodological choices and study designs ensure that the biological signals from the main factors are not confounded by variation from unwanted factors 178 . Notably, molecular profiles in post-mortem gene expression studies are affected by RNA degradation and post-mortem intervals 179 , but other technical factors including library preparation and sequencing depth in RNA-seq analysis should also be carefully evaluated 180 , 181 .

Additionally, we note two important points about studies that construct predictive models and studies that make causal claims. For studies that develop predictive models, such as disease classifiers, experimental design should include the estimation of a model on initial data followed by evaluation of accuracy in held out or, preferably, independent data 182 . As far as causality is concerned, most molecular profiling studies, especially those using post-mortem tissue, cannot show causality without follow-up controlled experiments or genetic evidence 169 – 171 . We also strongly suggest the experimental validation of key network predictions, as this provides avenues for refinement and biological grounding of the network 30 , 32 , 153 , 170 .

As shown by multiple studies, gene network analyses can aid in understanding genetic association studies. Grouping genetic findings using disease- and tissue-relevant modules can increase the power to detect genetic associations with disease by combining signals that reflect similar underlying biology while simultaneously informing biological mechanism by functionally annotating genetic findings 30 , 109 , 122 , 183 . Enrichment for genetic variants in a module can be evaluated using gene set enrichment methods, which rely on comparing enrichment in a module relative to a control gene set. However, studies have demonstrated biases in gene length, gene mutability and other factors that can drive gene set enrichment instead of a true biological signal. For example, longer genes are more likely to be implicated by CNVs and SNVs 87 , 184 , 185 , and genes highly expressed in the brain, particularly those involved in synaptic function, are longer on average than other genes 186 . These biases inflate enrichment results and can result in false positives, so it is important to identify appropriate control sets or to apply the correct statistical methods (permutation tests or covariate modelling 187 ). We note that each of the points discussed here and in BOX 3 is applicable to many other types of high-throughput data and that there are many valid variations to FIG. 2a .

## Future directions
In this Review, we have discussed how transcriptomic and integrative network approaches have been applied to provide a systems-level understanding of CNS disorders in an unbiased and reproducible manner. Mapping genetic variants to gene expression and PPI networks has been fruitful, but most disease-associated variation in complex diseases lies in the noncoding regulatory regions of the genome 188 . The next crucial step for high-throughput molecular studies in the brain will be to understand regulatory alterations and interactions during development with histone mark profiling and chromosome conformation capture approaches 189 , 190 . Additionally, understanding transcriptomic and epigenetic changes in more homogeneous cellular populations, or at a single-cell resolution, will greatly improve our mechanistic understanding of normal human brain development. Initial maps of these neurobiologically relevant epigenetic landscapes and cell type differences, mostly at the tissue level, are under construction by the PsychENCODE consortium.

As noted throughout this Review, studies of proteomic data are highly complementary to co-expression data and have revealed a crucial level of organization and regulation at the translational and post-translational levels. A particularly salient example is the synaptic signalling apparatus, more specifically the postsynaptic density (PSD), which has been extensively characterized at the protein level in humans and mice, showing key areas of overlap and divergence 191 , 192 . However, developmental and cell subtype differences in the PSD are not well understood, so obtaining PSD co-expression and PPI networks in relevant neural tissue and time points, similar to what BrainSpan has done for gene expression, will be invaluable. Currently, high-throughput, high dynamic range spatial and temporal data from minute sample quantities with proteomics are not available, so creative integration of cell type-specific transcriptional data with more generic PPI data may provide an approximation of the regional or cellular differences in synaptic structure in the near future. The development of methods, including benchmarking and refining methods for the integration of different forms of data (for example, PPI and gene expression data), developing tools for exploring network structure at a more fine-grained level, and empirically defining the most sensitive and robust network approaches, will also be crucial.

One of the greatest challenges is to systematically infer causality in molecular networks with a systems genetics approach 168 , 169 . This will necessitate more comprehensive eQTL studies, particularly in early brain development and disease 170 . Core molecular pathways that are confirmed to be perturbed in disease can then be interrogated with drug or environment perturbation data 193 , 194 to identify interventions that will perturb networks from a disease state into a healthy state. This area of in silico drug screening based on DGE or network modules has barely been explored in the CNS, but it has considerable promise 193 . Additionally, with the advent of mandatory electronic medical records, population-level studies, including longitudinal data for many simple phenotypes, coupled with biobanking, can provide the scale needed to more fully understand genetic contributions to disease risk as well as disease relationships across the lifespan 195 – 197 .

Even once we have the information from thousands of genomes, biological insights into the CNS require the assessment of relevant behavioural and cognitive phenotypes, which are not well defined for most neuropsychiatric diseases 198 , 199 and are rarely collected in large populations. Genome-wide transcriptomic approaches provide a quantitative endophenotype, or a biomarker, that genetic association studies can use to further refine the measurement of disease states. Transcriptomic and other molecular systems measurements can also be correlated with systems neuroscience phenotypes, such as MRI and functional MRI measurements, or behavioural phenotypes to identify non-invasive indicators of disease state 4 ( FIG. 1a ).

## Conclusions
Currently, much basic and translational neuroscience research is still focused on candidate genes and candidate hypotheses, so sceptics may question the value of measuring entire systems. However, biological complexity cannot be ignored; genome-wide measurements, in conjunction with studying individual genes and pathways, are essential to address the true underlying mechanisms of neurodevelopmental and neurodegenerative disorders. Well-designed, reproducible molecular profiling studies allow biologists to simultaneously evaluate hypotheses in an unbiased manner and to generate new hypotheses. Although certainly vast and seemingly complex, gene networks provide an organizational framework that simplifies the process of hypothesis generation and testing. The general paradigm of using correlational and physical interaction molecular networks in neurobiology to understand molecular systems changes can be applied across methodologies and enables the investigation of relationships that span multiple levels of analysis. The results of high-quality genome-wide studies will be essential to develop and test hypotheses that look beyond where our current knowledge ends to develop a more encompassing view of the problems posed by neurodevelopmental and neurodegenerative disorders, and their potential solutions.