# Title
Human umbilical cord plasma proteins revitalize hippocampal function in aged mice

# Abstract
Ageing drives changes in neuronal and cognitive function, the decline of which is a major feature of many neurological disorders. The hippocampus, a brain region subserving roles of spatial and episodic memory and learning, is sensitive to the detrimental effects of ageing at morphological and molecular levels. With advancing age, synapses in various hippocampal subfields exhibit impaired long-term potentiation 1 , an electrophysiological correlate of learning and memory. At the molecular level, immediate early genes are among the synaptic plasticity genes that are both induced by long-term potentiation 2 , 3 , 4 and downregulated in the aged brain 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 . In addition to revitalizing other aged tissues 9 , 10 , 11 , 12 , 13 , exposure to factors in young blood counteracts age-related changes in these central nervous system parameters 14 , 15 , 16 , although the identities of specific cognition-promoting factors or whether such activity exists in human plasma remains unknown 17 . We hypothesized that plasma of an early developmental stage, namely umbilical cord plasma, provides a reservoir of such plasticity-promoting proteins. Here we show that human cord plasma treatment revitalizes the hippocampus and improves cognitive function in aged mice. Tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases 2 (TIMP2), a blood-borne factor enriched in human cord plasma, young mouse plasma, and young mouse hippocampi, appears in the brain after systemic administration and increases synaptic plasticity and hippocampal-dependent cognition in aged mice. Depletion experiments in aged mice revealed TIMP2 to be necessary for the cognitive benefits conferred by cord plasma. We find that systemic pools of TIMP2 are necessary for spatial memory in young mice, while treatment of brain slices with TIMP2 antibody prevents long-term potentiation, arguing for previously unknown roles for TIMP2 in normal hippocampal function. Our findings reveal that human cord plasma contains plasticity-enhancing proteins of high translational value for targeting ageing- or disease-associated hippocampal dysfunction.

## Materials and Methods
Aged male WT C57BL/6 mice were obtained from the National Institute on Aging aged rodent colony. NOD.Cg- Prkdcscid; Il2rgtm1Wjl /SzJ mice 18 (‘NSG’ mice) on a NOD/ShiLtJ background, young TIMP2 knockout 28 , or WT mice were obtained from Jackson Laboratories (unless otherwise indicated), bred, and maintained according to Jackson recommendations to minimize opportunistic infections. Persistent hyperactive behaviour in female NSG mice motivated the use of male mice in behavioural studies. All mice were kept on a 12-h light/dark cycle and provided ad libitum access to food and water. ‘Vehicle’ treatments consisted of phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) in all instances. All animal care and procedures complied with the Animal Welfare Act and were in accordance with institutional guidelines and approved by the V.A. Palo Alto Committee on Animal Research and the institutional administrative panel of laboratory animal care at Stanford University.

Given the transient nature of c-Fos expression and the likelihood of adverse effects after chronic treatment of normal mice with human plasma, we used the TRAP-FOS ( FOS CreERT2/+ ; R26 AI14/+ ) mouse model 23 to examine c-Fos activation following neonatal plasma treatment. TRAP-FOS mice on a C57Bl/6J background were given a single intravenous injection of human plasma or vehicle (175 μl), followed 2 h later by intraperitoneal injection of the tamoxifen derivative 4-hydroxytamoxifen (4-OHT; 50 mg per kg; freshly prepared). Seventy-two hours after injection of 4-OHT, mice were euthanized for immunohistochemical analysis.

Heterochronic parabiotic pairs consisting of aged and young mice (18-month-old with 3-month-old) or isochronic pairs consisting of aged mice (18-month-old with 18-month-old) were connected according to previously described methods 9 , 16 , 31 . Briefly, under aseptic conditions and continuous isoflurane anaesthesia, mirror-image incisions at left and right flanks were made through the skin with smaller incisions through the peritoneal cavity. Adjacent peritoneal cavities were sutured together continuously and closed. Knee and elbow joints from adjacent mice were sutured together to facilitate coordinated locomotion during recovery to minimize distress. Skin was stapled together using surgical autoclips (9-mm, Clay Adams). Surgeries were performed on heating pads and body temperature was monitored throughout the procedure. Mice in each pair were injected subcutaneously with Baytril antibiotic (5 μg per g) and buprenorphine (0.05–0.1 μg ml −1 ) for pain management and 0.9% (w/v) NaCl for hydration. Pairs were monitored continuously for signs of distress according to recovery parameters characterized in previous work 31 .

Cord (live umbilical venous collection at birth), young, and elderly blood was collected for the isolation of ethylenediaminetetraacetate (EDTA)-plasma under Stanford Institutional Review Board consent and approval. Young (median = 22 years) and elderly (median = 66 years) healthy subjects were male and predominantly caucasian; elderly subjects were cognitively normal according to neurological examination. Isolated plasma was stored in aliquots at −80 °C until analysis or before pooling and dialysis to remove EDTA for treatment experiments where indicated. Intravenous injections of human plasma (175 μl) were administered six times for staining/qPCR experiments and eight times for behavioural and LTP experiments, with 2 days between each injection. Under 3.8% (w/v) chloral hydrate or 2.5% (v/v) avertin anaesthesia, mouse blood was collected with EDTA as anticoagulant by terminal intracardial bleeding. EDTA-plasma was isolated by centrifugation at 1,000 g for 10 min at 4 °C before aliquoting and storage at −80 °C before analysis. In the anti-TIMP2 IgG- or control IgG-treated cohort of mice monitored for signs of toxicity, serum was collected at the conclusion of behavioural assessments. Under 2.5% avertin anaesthesia, blood was drawn by intracardial bleeding, allowed to clot for 45 min at room temperature, and then serum was collected by centrifugation at 2,000 g for 10 min at 4 °C. Serum was submitted for measurement of electrolytes and other measures of organ function by the Animal Diagnostic Laboratory at Stanford Veterinary Service Center. One sample from each group was found to be haemolysed and thus not submitted to avoid confounding haemolysis-sensitive assays.

Quantitative measurements for 66 detectable plasma biomarkers in Extended Data Fig. 1 were made by fee-for-service (Myriad RBM) using the multiplexed HumanMAP version 2.0 platform; two-way hierarchical clustering analysis was performed using Cluster 3.0 using correlation similarity metric distance. Left-censored values below detection were replaced with half the detection limit. Quantitative validation for candidate factors from customized protein microarray results identified from overlap analysis was done with commercially available ELISAs for CSF2 (human V-Plex, Meso Scale Diagnostics) and TIMP2 (human Quantikine, R&D Systems) according to the manufacturer’s specifications. Equivalent volumes of plasma (2 μl) were loaded onto 4–12% bis-tris gels for SDS–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis before transferring to nitrocellulose membranes for immunodetection of mouse TIMP2 (1:500; Rabbit mAb; Cell Signaling, D18B7). For hippocampal western blotting of TIMP2, dissected hippocampi were manually dounce-homogenized with 60 strokes in radioimmunoprecipitation assay buffer with protease inhibitors and briefly sonicated (5 s, three times, 15% amplitude; Branson Ultrasonics) before centrifugation at 20,000 g for 25 min at 4 °C. Immunoblotting for TIMP2 was performed as described above, and neuron-specific enolase was immunoblotted for loading normalization (1:5,000; Mouse IgG; Thermo, 5E2). Band intensities were quantified using ImageJ software as described 32 .

Customized mouse or human versions of protein microarrays were created, as described 33 , solely as a discovery platform with which to identify promising hits that could be validated by subsequent, more quantitative assays. Specifically, ELISA-grade antibodies against several hundred secreted and potentially cleaved transmembrane mouse or human signalling proteins were obtained from commercial sources and printed in five replicates onto SuperEpoxy2 glass slides (Arrayit) with a robotic microarrayer (NanoPrint LM210, Arrayit) fitted with 16 946MP4B pins. Arrays were vacuum-sealed and stored at 4 °C until use. Before labelling with biotin, human or mouse plasma samples were diluted and dialysed (96-well Dispodialyzer, 5-kDa molecular weight cut-off, Harvard Apparatus), exchanging PBS (pH 6.5 for mouse and pH 8.0 for human arrays) multiple times at 4 °C. Samples were then biotinylated on primary amino groups (EZ-link NHS-Biotin, Thermo-Scientific) overnight at 4 °C, and unbound biotin was removed by PBS dialysis. Arrays were then blocked with 3% (w/v) casein solution before incubation with the individual biotinylated samples overnight at 4 °C. Following washes, arrays were incubated with Alexa Fluor 555-conjugated streptavidin secondary antibodies (Life Technologies) for detection of the fluorescent signals using a GenePix4400A scanner and GenePix Pro7 software (Molecular Devices). A complete list (HUGO Gene Nomenclature Committee official gene names) of all unique proteins we sought to detect with arrays for the generation of candidates is provided in Supplementary Table 1 .

Background for fluorescent signals of individual array spots was subtracted and raw data average intensities were calculated from five replicates per antibody. Antibodies with insufficient signal to noise were filtered out. Negative values were imputed and replaced by 50% of the lowest values detected for a given antibody’s signal. Log-transformation and iterative row- and column-wise median centering and normalization were performed using Cluster 3.0 (ref. 34 ) or log-transformed following a Shapiro–Wilk test to assess normality ( P < 0.05). Z -scored values were used for unsupervised, array by protein cluster analysis before heat map visualization using Java TreeView 1.0.13 (ref. 35 ) on the basis of d -score rankings from SAM 3.0 algorithm 36 . Relative protein expression levels correlated with ageing or significantly different between aged isochronic and aged heterochronic plasma were determined by SAM. d -scores were assigned to each protein on the basis of multi-comparison analysis of expression changes across arrays. To generate a list of candidate proteins that might improve plasticity in aged mice, d -scores from SAM were used to rank proteins that declined with age in the mouse array, and a composite meta-ranking was made by comparing this to the d -scored proteins that declined in the human array (from cord to elderly). A list was created in the same way to capture cord-plasma-enriched proteins also elevated in the plasma of aged heterochronic mice (sharing young blood) versus aged-isochronic parabiont plasma. Extended Data Fig. 6a reflects sequential sorting by q value and d -score of the list. For limited in vivo screens, TIMP2, CSF2, and GAS6 were chosen from this list on the basis of literature review and availability of suitable recombinant protein. Pre- and post-surgery plasma from parabionts was also collected for comparison of changes, in addition to examining young and aged isochronic plasma protein changes for validation.

For subsequent mouse plasma experiments to examine relative protein abundance in TIMP2 KO versus WT mouse plasma ( Extended Data Fig. 10a ), mouse protein arrays were printed and run as described for earlier arrays; multiple steps of filtering of the raw data were performed on the basis of antibody performance before normalization during further optimization of the platform. Briefly, antibodies with low signal, large coefficient of variation across five replicate spots, or those with high coefficients of variation across four identical biological replicates (four random subjects run in four identical repeats) were filtered out. Non-detectable values were imputed and replaced by 50% of the lowest value detected for a given antibody. Each signal was normalized by the median of all signals on one array, followed by log-transformation after assessing normality (Shapiro–Wilk test, P < 0.05) and then Z -scoring across all arrays. After filtering, 123 antibodies were used for differential expression analysis. Student’s t -test ( α = 0.05) was performed to compare differences between two groups with q < 0.15.

After eight systemic injections of the indicated human plasma versus vehicle (PBS) in either young or aged NSG mice or rTIMP2 (50 μg kg −1 ) versus vehicle in aged WT mice, deep anaesthesia was induced with isoflurane before mice were euthanized. Brains were removed and placed in ice-chilled artificial cerebrospinal fluid (in mM: NaCl 124.0, KCl 2.5, KH 2 PO 4 1.2, CaCl 2 2.4, MgSO 4 1.3, NaHCO 3 26.0 and glucose 10.0 (pH 7.4)) that was continuously bubbled with 5% CO 2 /95% O 2 . Hippocampal slices (400 μm) were prepared using a tissue chopper (Stoelting) and incubated in continuously oxygenated artificial cerebrospinal fluid for at least 1 h before recording with continuous 5% CO 2 /95% O 2 bubbling. Data were collected using an Axopatch-2B amplifier and pClamp 10.4 software (Axon Instruments). Slices were in submerged mode at room temperature, continuously perfused with oxygenated artificial cerebrospinal fluid at a flow rate of 2 ml min −1 using a peristaltic pump (Haake Buchler). Population spikes were recorded in the granule cell layer of the dentate gyrus with glass microelectrodes (resistance 1–3 MΩ). Stimulation of the perforant path with biphasic current pulses (0.2 ms duration for one phase, 0.4 ms in total) was delivered in intervals of 10 s through a bipolar, concentric stimulating electrode (FHC). Using this frequency stimulation protocol, no obvious synaptic depression or facilitation was observed. Slices were recorded within 8 h of dissection. Signals were digitized at 20 kHz, and a Gaussian low-pass filter was applied as needed to reduce noise. Input–output curves were constructed for each slice using stimulus intensity from threshold to 1.0 mA. Test pulse intensities were adjusted to evoke field potential to approximately 35–50% of maximal input–output response. Tetanic stimulation was executed with two trains of 100 pulses (0.4 ms pulse duration, 100 Hz) delivered with an inter-train interval of 5 s. Amplitudes of population spikes were measured from the initial phase of the negative wave with Clampfit 10.4. LTP was plotted as the percentage of baseline just before tetanic stimulation (mean ± s.e.m.) and the graph scaled to reflect effects in the maintenance phase (first one or two points after baseline could be outside scale). The maintenance phase was quantified over the final 6 min (39.5–45.5 min) of the LTP experiment. Paired-pulse ratios were measured with various inter-pulse intervals (20 ms, 50 ms, 100 ms). Paired-pulse ratio was calculated before or after LTP as the percentage of the amplitude of the second response minus the first response divided by the value of the first response. In rare cases, values were not obtained at all time points owing to experimental or equipment error. Data were processed and analysed with pClamp 10.4, Microsoft Excel, and StatView 5.0.

For experiments in which isolated slices from young WT (C57Bl/6J) or TIMP2 KO mice were assessed, or for those in which slices were incubated with vehicle (PBS), control IgG (R&D) or anti-TIMP2 IgG (R&D, AF971), LTP was performed in essentially the same fashion but with minor differences. Briefly, tetanic stimulation consisted of one train of 100 pulses (0.4 ms pulse duration, 100 Hz) since preliminary experiments revealed that two trains of high-frequency stimulation in younger slices tended to create short-term depression of field potentials in dentate gyrus, lasting approximately 10 min. For experiments involving bath incubation of the isolated slices, we adapted a previously described method for antibody blocking experiments in the context of LTP 37 , 38 . Slices were incubated with fresh control IgG (R&D Systems) or anti-TIMP2 IgG (R&D Systems) at 4 μg ml −1 in a clean chamber for ~2 h (1.8 ± 0.2 h, IgG control; and 1.9 ± 0.3 h, anti-TIMP2 IgG) at room temperature before transferring to recording chamber. Antibodies or vehicle were perfused continuously through a closed loop during recording through silicon tubing (VWR) (with the exception of a 5-cm portion connected to the pump). BSA was omitted from perfusion to minimize bubbling; efforts were taken to minimize bubbling of artificial cerebrospinal fluid in the perfusion system that would perturb oxygen and pH consistency.

Recombinant mouse TIMP2 (R&D Systems) or CSF2 (Sino Biological) proteins were resuspended in physiological buffer, aliquoted and stored at −80 °C for single-injection use at 50 μg kg −1 . Mice were given systemic injections (intraperitoneal) of vehicle or recombinant protein every other day at frequency and durations indicated in the respective figure legends.

To remove TIMP2 present in human umbilical cord plasma, anti-TIMP2 IgG (R&D) or goat control IgG (R&D) were efficiently conjugated to 2.8-μm superparamagnetic M-270 Epoxy dynabeads according to the manufacturer’s instructions (ThermoFisher) using a coupling ratio of 5 μg of antibody per 1 mg of beads for 24-h covalent conjugation at 37 °C with end-over-end rotation. Steps were taken to minimize detergent carryover in certain steps, for example substitution with PBS, in preparation for treatments in vivo . Freshly dialysed cord plasma from the collections of nine individuals was thawed, pooled, and divided into 500-μl aliquots before incubation with prepared control IgG-bead or anti-TIMP2 IgG-bead solutions overnight at 4 °C. An aliquot of cord plasma without beads was carried through the procedure to verify no loss due to handling/degradation. Isolated control IgG-depleted or anti-TIMP2 IgG-depleted plasma was frozen and stored in preparation for injections of aged NSG mice. Human TIMP2 ELISA on the pooled, depleted plasma revealed TIMP2 levels well below the detection limit of the assay compared with levels measured in cord plasma aliquot before depletion (‘pre-depletion’), and no reduction was detected in control IgG-depleted plasma ( Extended Data Fig. 10b ). Complete elution of the beads in denaturing/reducing conditions was performed, and the resulting elution was separated by SDS–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis before silver staining according to standard methods. Briefly, gel was incubated in 10% acetic acid/50% methanol (fixation), sensitized in 2.5 mM sodium thiosulfate, silver stained in silver nitrate (12 mM), and developed in a solution of sodium carbonate (0.3 M), sodium thiosulfate (25 μM), and formaldehyde (0.02% (w/w)). The silver-stained gel revealed a depletion pattern that was indistinguishable between the IgG control or anti-TIMP2 IgG depletion conditions ( Extended Data Fig. 10c ).

A modified Barnes maze test was performed similarly to that previously described 20 , and tailored minimally to our strains of mice. Briefly, a large circular maze containing 40 holes was centred over a pedestal and elevated approximately 40 cm above the floor. The escape hole consisted of a long PVC elbow joint connector that was similar in texture and colour to the maze. Distinct visual cues were placed at four equally spaced points around the maze, as shown in Extended Data Fig. 2g . An overhead light provided additional motivation to find the escape hole. The task proceeded over a period of 4 days, with four trials on each day for each mouse. With overhead illumination and a persistent 2 kHz tone, mice were given 90 s for each trial to identify the escape hole by jumping in or identifying the hole with extended/overt head pokes. If mice failed to identify the escape hole within the allotted 90 s, they were gently guided by light tapping/directing towards the escape hole and scored at the allotted investigation time. The escape hole position was fixed within a day but changed for each successive day of testing. For each trial within a day, the starting location for the mouse was rotated relative to the escape hole position. Between each trial, the maze and escape hole were thoroughly cleaned to remove any cues that might affect performance in subsequent trials.

Several sensory modalities were assessed in young and aged NSG mice. Pain sensitivity to the foot-shock apparatus used for fear-conditioning was assessed using the procedure described in ref. 39 . In this assay, each mouse was placed in the foot-shock chamber with a front-mounted camera to visualize various pain sensitivity parameters, which encompassed four clearly defined behaviours, as described 39 , 40 : ‘flinch’, ‘run’, ‘vocalization’, and ‘two-paw jump’. One-second shocks of various intensities were delivered in the following order (in milliamps): 0.05, 0.08, 0.10, 0.13, 0.16, 0.20, 0.25, 0.30, 0.35, 0.40, 0.45, each spaced by 30 s of recovery time. Thresholds reflected the minimum shock intensity at which each behaviour was observed using the front-mounted camera video. To assess visual ability, the visual cliff task was adapted according to the classical method 41 , a task recently used to detect complex age-related visual deficits in models of neurodegeneration 42 as a means of validating spatially dependent cognitive assays. Briefly, a chamber was constructed with dimensions 60 cm × 60 cm × 30 cm using white plastic and a transparent (non-glare) bottom. The fabricated box was extended halfway across a table elevated 1 m above the floor. Chequered fabric served as the floor below the box, which then draped downwards, extending onto the floor to create the visual cliff illusion. A series of light sources illuminated the chamber interior to prevent dark retreat areas, and an additional light was directed towards the edge to accentuate the cliff illusion. Two trials were performed for each mouse; a stopwatch was used to score the time elapsed before stepping onto the ‘cliff side’ as well as the duration spent on the ‘bench side’ or ‘cliff side’ of the chamber in the 5-min period. The auditory startle response assay was used to assess auditory sensory processing (Kinder Scientific). Each mouse was placed in a non-restrictive, ventilated, sound-attenuated chamber atop a sensor platform. After a 5-min acclimation period inside the chamber, startle sensitivity to various audible pulses (80, 90, 100, 110, 120 dB) was recorded. Five trials of each sound intensity were performed for each mouse, and each trial was presented once in a random sequence within each test session block with a variable inter-trial interval of 12–30 s (15 s on average). Startle response amplitudes were recorded and analysed via software interface (StartleMonitor), and the maximum response to each sound stimulus across the five trials was considered the acoustic response. All trials were performed in the same apparatus to minimize system error across trials, and aged and young mice were tested in a randomized sequence. The apparatus was calibrated using a standard 100-g weight.

For enriched housing exploration experiments to examine c-Fos activation under conditions of physiological neuronal activity, aged WT mice were treated systemically with vehicle or rTIMP2 (50 μg kg −1 ) over a period of 1 week before a 10-min exposure to enriched housing (toy ball, tunnel, toy car, bell, blocks, wall-mounted visual cues, etc.). After the exploration, mice in enriched housing were returned to home cages for 90 min before being euthanized.

In young WT mice that had been injected with 60 μg kg −1 anti-TIMP2 antibody (R&D Systems, AF971; dose based on the in vitro ND 50 (50% neutralizing dose from the manufacturer) or goat control IgG (R&D Systems), novel location recognition was performed as previously described 43 . Briefly, on day 1 (training), mice were first habituated to the open-field arena, which contained wall-mounted visual cues, for a period of 6 minutes. Mice were given three consecutive trials during which they explored two objects in fixed positions. On day 2, mice explored the same arena but with one object displaced. Investigative interactions with objects were manually scored in a blinded fashion to assess object discrimination: that is, percentage object discrimination = ((displaced object interaction time)/(total interaction time of both objects)) × 100.

To assess anxiety-like and general exploratory activity levels, an open-field assay was used in which mice were placed in an illuminated, novel arena for 360 s and allowed to explore. Open-field exploratory behaviour was analysed using TopScan Lite software (Cleversys), which divided the chamber into a centre zone, in which mice tended to exhibit anxiety-associated activity, and the floor zone, in which mice exhibited normal activity behaviour. The SMARTCage beam-break monitoring system was used to assess general measures of activity in a home-cage-sized arena 31 , which allowed activity assessment independent of anxiety-like behaviours associated with open-field exploration. Briefly, mice were placed inside monitored home cages that were each lined with bedding and covered with a cage top. Measures of activity (overall activity, rearing activity, distance travelled, average velocity) were recorded and analysed using the CageCenter tracking software/computer interface over the 360-s period of exploration.

Fear-conditioning experiments were performed as previously described 15 , 16 . Briefly, mice were trained to associate the cage context with an aversive stimulus (light foot-shock), allowing us to measure freezing levels indicative of hippocampal-dependent memory. Our protocol for NSG (NOD/ShiLtJ background) and WT (C57Bl/6 background) mice differed slightly. For NSG mice, training parameters on day 1 were as follows: two periods of 30 s consisting of paired cue light and 1,000-Hz tone followed by 2 s foot-shock (0.7 mA) with a 180-s interval between. On day 2 of testing, NSG mice exhibited recall after 90 s in context and freezing levels were analysed for the subsequent 90 s. The cued task was performed by changing the cage context (fabricated inserts with novel texture, colour, and odorant). Mice were placed in the novel context and exposed to the same tone and cue light from day 1 (training) after 180 s of exploration. Freezing levels were analysed for the subsequent 90 s. Fear-conditioning training for WT mice on a C57Bl/6 background used the following parameters: two periods of 30 s consisting of paired cue light and 1,000-Hz tone followed by a 2-s foot-shock (0.6 mA) with a 180-s interval between. The following day, mice were re-exposed to the context where freezing levels (recall) were particularly striking for the last 120 s for TIMP2 treatment or the first 120 s with CSF2 treatment. For the cued task, mice were placed in a novel context and exposed to the same tone and cue light from day 1 (training) after 120 s of exploration. Freezing levels were analysed for the subsequent 90 s. All freezing levels were measured using a FreezeScan video tracking system (Cleversys). Owing to variation in baseline cognitive performance reported previously for aged WT (C57Bl/6 background) mice 43 and routinely observed in our experience, aged WT mice were exposed to novel location recognition testing, as previously described 43 , to score hippocampal-dependent memory performance. These values were used to divide mice equally into the two groups well before treatments and subsequent behavioural testing. After treatment of the equally stratified groups, blinded identification numbers were assigned to all mice, and the numbers were randomized for Barnes maze and fear-conditioning tests.

Brain tissue processing, immunohistochemistry, and immunofluorescence experiments were performed as described previously 15 , 16 . Briefly, mice were euthanized with 3.8% (w/v) chloral hydrate or 2.5% (v/v) Avertin and transcardially perfused with chilled 0.9% (w/v) saline or PBS. Brains were dissected and hemibrains were isolated for immunohistochemistry and post-fixed in 4% (w/v) paraformaldehyde for 48 h at 4 °C before preservation in 30% (w/v) sucrose in PBS. Hemibrains were sectioned coronally at a thickness of 40 μm on a freezing–sliding microtome, and sections were stored in cryoprotective medium at −20 °C. Free-floating sections were blocked with appropriate serum before incubation at 4 °C with primary antibodies at the following concentrations for light microscopy: c-Fos, 1:10,000, PC38, Oncogene Research Products; doublecortin (DCX), 1:500, SC8066, Santa Cruz Biotech; CD68, 1:600, MCA1957, BioRad; pCREB, 06–519, 1:5,000, Millipore; and the following concentrations for confocal microscopy: c-Fos, 1:400, 9F6, Cell Signaling; Gad67, 1:2,000, MAB5406, Millipore; Prox1, 1:500, AF2727, R&D Systems; NeuN, 1:200, MAB377, Millipore; mCherry, 1:200, AB0040–200, Sicgen; TIMP2, 1:100 (two nights), AF971, R&D Systems; Iba1, 1:500, 019–19741, Wako; and TO-PRO-3, 1:1,000, T3605, Life Technologies. For light microscopy, staining was visualized by incubating sections with respective biotinylated secondary antibodies, followed by reaction with the ABC kit (Vector) and diaminobenzidine (DAB; Sigma) staining. Images of brain sections were acquired by automated slide scanner (Hamamatsu Photonics) or by conventional light microscopy. National Institutes of Health ImageJ software was used to quantify the percentage of hippocampal area covered by thresholded CD68 staining or mean intensity for pCREB. The number of DCX-positive cells within the dentate gyri was counted manually and the total estimated as described 15 for both hemispheres. The number of c-Fos-positive cells in dentate gyrus was determined in five regularly spaced sections from the rostral to caudal extent of the hippocampus and doubled to account for both hemispheres. Manual counts of the number of c-Fos-positive cells present in three regularly spaced sections of lateral/basolateral amygdala and retrosplenial/motor cortex were made starting at −1.38 mm with respect to bregma in the mouse Scalable Brain Atlas 44 , 45 . All counts were performed in a blinded fashion.

For immunofluorescence experiments, after incubation with fluorescently conjugated secondary antibodies, brain sections were mounted and coverslipped with ProLong Gold (Life Technologies) before imaging with a confocal laser-scanning microscope (Zeiss). Absolute counts of the number of c-Fos-positive cells (or FOS-TRAPed cells) or co-stained cells were obtained through the entire z plane (~40 μm) using five sections per mouse for hippocampus (rostral through caudal extent of dentate gyrus) or the procedure described above for lateral/basolateral amygdala and retrosplenial/motor cortex counts. Co-localization was assessed at 1 Airy unit for each laser. Tile-scanning was performed for representative images taken for TRAP-FOS mice to provide high-resolution images of large areas of CA1 and dentate gyrus. Four sections per mouse (rostral through caudal extent of dentate gyrus) were used to count TIMP2 + cells possessing NeuN + or NeuN − nuclei or TIMP2 + cells co-expressing Iba1 within the dentate gyrus (subgranular zone and hilar subregions) of the hippocampus through a 25.6-μm z -stack acquired using a pinhole of 1 Airy unit for each laser. Optimization experiments revealed that TIMP2 KO sections were devoid of signal, validating the specificity of the TIMP2 antibody ( Extended Data Fig. 7e ). TIMP2 + cells in dentate gyrus/hilus were consistent with the localization pattern observed in bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC)-TIMP2–eGFP (enhanced green fluorescent protein) mice as part of the GENSAT Project’s mouse brain expression atlas ( http://www.gensat.org/imagenavigator.jsp?imageID=72836 ).

Conjugation of recombinant mouse TIMP2 (R&D) and BSA (Sigma) with 1,4,7,10-tetraazacyclododecane-1,4,7,10-tetraacetic acid (DOTA) was performed according to standard published procedures using metal-free buffers 46 , 47 . Briefly, a solution of DOTA-NHS ester (Macrocyclics) in dimethyl sulfoxide (25 mmol l −1 ; 9–12 μl) was added to 200 μl of HEPES buffer (0.1 mol l −1 , pH 8.8) containing 100 μg of TIMP2 or BSA, and the reaction mixture was incubated at room temperature for 1 h. Excess DOTA-NHS was removed by Zeba Spin Desalting Columns (0.5 ml, 7K molecular weight cut-off, ThermoFisher Scientific), and the resulting solution was buffer-exchanged into ammonium acetate buffer (0.1 M, pH 5.5) for 64 Cu labelling. DOTA-conjugate solutions were concentrated by ultrafiltration (Vivaspin 0.5 ml, Sartorius) to 0.1–0.4 mg ml −1 and stored at 4 °C before radiolabelling. For TIMP2, all conjugation steps were performed <6 h before radiolabelling, and the final DOTA-conjugated protein was kept on ice. The numbers of chelators coupled per TIMP2 or BSA were estimated to be 2 and 2.2 respectively, by matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry.

Radiolabelling of DOTA–TIMP2 and DOTA–BSA with 64 Cu (half-life = 12.7 h) was performed using standard methods with some modifications 46 , 47 , 48 . In brief, DOTA–TIMP2 (25 μg) or DOTA–BSA (25 μg) in 50 μl of 0.25 mol l −1 ammonium acetate buffer (0.1 M, pH 5.5) was mixed with pH-balanced [ 64 Cu]Cl 2 solution (44–74 MBq, pH 5–5.5, University of Wisconsin, Madison) at 37 °C with gentle shaking at 300 r.p.m. After incubation (30 min for TIMP–DOTA and 60 min for BSA–DOTA), 0.1 M EDTA (0.5 M, pH 8.0) was added to a final concentration of 0.01 M and incubated at room temperature for 15 min to scavenge unchelated [ 64 Cu]Cl 2 in the reaction mixture. Purification of 64 Cu-labelled DOTA–TIMP2 and 64 Cu-labelled DOTA–BSA was achieved by G25 Sephadex size-exclusion purification (PD-10 column). Radiochemical purity was determined by instant thin-layer chromatography with TEC-Control Chromatography strips (Biodex Medical Systems, Shirley, New York), developed in saline, and size-exclusion liquid chromatography with a Phenomenex SEC 3000 column (Torrance, California, USA) with sodium phosphate buffer (0.1 mol l −1 , pH 6.8) at a flow rate of 1.0 ml min −1. 64 Cu-labelled DOTA–TIMP2 and 64 Cu-labelled DOTA–BSA were obtained with high specific radioactivity (>75 GBq μmol −1 ), radiochemical purity (>99%), and labelling efficiency (66–73%), and formulated in PBS (0.1 mol l −1 NaCl, 0.05 mol l −1 sodium phosphate (pH 7.4)).

Mice were given single intraperitoneal injections of either 64 Cu-labelled DOTA–TIMP2 (1.59 ± 0.09 MBq) or 64 Cu-labelled DOTA–BSA (2.50 ± 0.06 MBq). After 1, 3, or 24 h, groups of mice injected with each tracer were deeply anaesthetized with 2.5% (v/v) Avertin, and blood samples (100–200 μl) were collected by cardiac puncture immediately before transcardial perfusion with ~30 ml chilled PBS. The brain was extracted from each mouse, placed in a tube for gamma counting, and weighed; satisfactory perfusions were verified by visual inspection of brain tissue. Tissue-associated radioactivity in blood and brain was assessed by an automated gamma counter (Cobra II Auto-Gamma counter; Packard Biosciences), normalized to tissue mass and to amount of radioactivity administered to each mouse, and decay-corrected to time of tracer injection using diluted aliquots of the initial administered dose as standards.

At 24 h after injection of 64 Cu-labelled TIMP2 (7.57 ± 0.15 MBq), mice were deeply anaesthetized with 2.5% (v/v) Avertin and perfused with ~30 ml chilled PBS. Brain tissue was quickly embedded in optimal-cutting temperature compound (Tissue-Tek), and coronal or sagittal sections (20 μm) were obtained for ex vivo autoradiography. Autoradiography was conducted using previously described methods 49 , confirming anatomical localization by Nissl staining (cresyl violet acetate; Sigma Aldrich) using standard techniques. In brief, sections of 20 μm were mounted on microscope slides (Fisherbrand Superfrost Plus Microscope Slides), air-dried for 10 min, and then exposed to a digital storage phosphor screen (Perkin Elmer, USA) for 72 h at −20 °C. The image plate was analysed using a Typhoon 9410 Variable Mode Imager (Amersham Biosciences, USA) and images were visualized and processed by ImageJ (image processing and analysis software in Java, version 1.45s).

Stability of 64 Cu-labelled TIMP2 in mouse brain 24 h after intraperitoneal injection of radiotracer (19.27 ± 1.32 MBq) was determined as described previously 50 with minor modifications, including the use of a Bioscan Flow-Count radioactivity detector to enable sensitive detection of potential radiometabolites. Briefly, mice were deeply anaesthetized with 2.5% (v/v) Avertin, and perfused with chilled PBS (~30 ml) 24 h after intraperitoneal injection of 64 Cu-labelled TIMP2. Brain tissue was quickly collected and transferred to a tube containing 750 μl ice-cold 70:30 methanol:sodium phosphate buffer (0.1 M, pH 6.8). Samples were homogenized using an Omni TH tissue homogenizer, and protein precipitates were sedimented by centrifugation (9,400 g , 10 min). Each supernatant (100 μμl) was analysed via high-performance liquid chromatography (fitted with a highly sensitive positron detector for radioactivity) using size-exclusion liquid chromatography with a Phenomenex SEC 3000 column (Torrance, California, USA) and sodium phosphate buffer (0.1 mol l −1 , pH 6.8) at a flow rate of 1.0 ml min −1 . The percentage ratio of intact 64 Cu-labelled TIMP2 ( t R = 11.5 min) was calculated as (peak area for 64 Cu-labelled TIMP2/total area of all peaks) × 100. More than 95% of the radioactivity was recovered from the column for the analysed samples.

After rapid dissection of hippocampi, tissue was preserved in RNA-later (Ambion) at 4 °C before storing at −80 °C until use. Hippocampal RNA was extracted according to the manufacturer’s instructions using an RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen). Bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies) quality control revealed high-quality RNA as assessed by RNA integrity number. Isolated RNA was used for transcription, labelling, and hybridization to whole-genome microarrays (Affymetrix, Mouse 2.0ST; with the assistance of Stanford Translational Applications Service Center/Protein and Nucleic Acid facilities) or to prepare cDNA with the RT 2 First Strand kit (SABiosciences) for qPCR. Samples were mixed with the RT 2 SYBR Green master mix (HotStart DNA Taq Polymerase, SABiosciences) and validated primers for key synaptic plasticity transcripts (RT 2 Profiler Kit, SABiosciences), before loading as technical duplicates for qPCR on a LightCycler 480 (Roche). C T values for tissue were normalized to four common reference genes as recommended by manufacturer. The ΔΔ C T method was used to provide gene expression values 51 . For whole-genome microarrays, gene expression for annotated genes was normalized and analysed using R package 3.1.2/Bioconductor, and two-way hierarchical clustering was performed using a correlation similarity metric distance. Whole-genome microarray data can be obtained using accession numbers E-MTAB-4087 or GSE75416 at ArrayExpress or GEO, respectively. Gene Ontology-based activation analysis was performed on significantly changed annotated genes with Ingenuity Pathway Analysis suite’s (Qiagen) Comparison Analysis tool to compare predicted pathway activation states across treatments using networks of changed genes and literature-based functional information. The software integrates gene changes with functional annotation information to predict an activation related to the degree and direction of gene changes in that category.

Two-group comparisons were made using two-tailed, unpaired Student’s t -test. For comparisons of more than two groups, one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s post-hoc test was used. For comparisons of multiple factors (for example, time × treatment), two-way ANOVA was used before post-hoc testing. Repeated-measures two-way ANOVA with Bonferroni’s post-hoc test was used for trial/day × treatment comparisons with repeated observations. Numbers of mice were estimated to be sufficient to detect statistically meaningful differences of at least 20% between or among groups using standard power calculations with α = 0.05 and power of 0.8 on the basis of pilot or similar experiments. Homogeneity of variance was assessed, and appropriate corrections were made if necessary. All experiments were performed in a randomized and blinded fashion. Data were analysed statistically using GraphPad Prism 6.0, the R 3.1.2 package for Extended Data Fig. 1 and Fig. 1b, c , and SAM 3.0 for protein microarrays. The value of α was 0.05, and data are expressed as mean ± s.e.m. * P < 0.05; ** P < 0.01; *** P < 0.001; **** P < 0.0001.

## Extended Data
a, Basic demographic characteristics of human subjects providing EDTA-plasma for corresponding quantitative analysis in b, and used for injections in Fig. 1 . For umbilical cord plasma samples from neonates, gestational age reflects full-term births, and the APGAR is a composite health score reflecting appearance, pulse, grimace, activity, and respiration 5 min after birth. Mini-mental state examination (MMSE) is a 30-point neurological assessment of cognitive impairment (0–30, where 30 is least impairment). b, Heat map from unsupervised hierarchical cluster analysis of multiplexed plasma protein markers for cord, young adult, or elderly subjects (blue and yellow shades represent lower and higher relative expression, respectively; asterisks denote factors for which scatter plots are shown in c–e). c–e, Multiplex quantification of plasma α-fetoprotein (AFP), human chorionic gonadotropin (CGB5), and immunoglobulin-M (IgM) demonstrating significant donor-dependent differences. One-way ANOVA followed Tukey’s post hoc test; ****P < 0.0001, ***P < 0.001; n = 7 (cord), n = 12 (young), n = 11 (elderly); mean ± s.e.m.

Representative images of young and aged NSG hippocampi stained for c-Fos (a; n = 7 mice per group; male; 4.1 ± 0.2 versus 11.1 ± 0.1 months old), newborn neuron marker doublecortin (b; DCX) (female mice at 4.1 ± 0.1 months old (n = 8) and 10.9 ± 0.1 months old (n = 7)), and microgliosis (c), as indicated by confocal microscopy (yellow) of Iba1+CD68+ staining (female mice at 4.1 ± 0.1 months old (n = 8) and 10.9 ± 0.1 months old (n = 7); for a–c, scale bars are 100 μm). d–f, Quantification of indicated areas in a–c. g, Schematic diagram of modified Barnes maze (left) and contextual fear-conditioning tasks (right). h, Four-day trial time course for modified Barnes maze showing escape hole latency for young and aged NSG mice (n = 4 per group; 4.5-month-old versus 11.2-month-old). i, Change in escape latency (acquisition rate) between indicated trials on day 4 of Barnes maze testing. j–l, Freezing levels for young and aged NSG mice at baseline (j), during exposure to previously aversive fear-conditioning context (k), or during exposure to chamber with training cues but new context (l) (n = 8 mice per group; 3.1 ± 0.1 versus 12.1 ± 0.1 months old). m, Thresholds for various pain-related behaviours using foot-shock grid (n = 6 NSG mice per group; 4.1 ± 0.1 versus 12.3 ± 0.3 months old). n, o, Proportion of time spent on bench (safe) side (n) and mean latency before stepping over cliff side (o) during the visual cliff task to assess visual ability (n = 10 NSG mice per group; 3.6 ± 0.2 versus 13.3 ± 0.1 months old). p, Acoustic startle response at various sound intensities (n = 10 mice per group; 3.6 ± 0.2 versus 13.3 ± 0.1 months old). q, Four-day trial Barnes maze time course showing latency to target hole for young (n = 9) and aged (n = 10) WT (C57Bl/6) mice (3-month-old versus 21-month-old). r, Change in escape latency (acquisition rate) between indicated trials on day 4 of Barnes maze testing. Two-way repeated-measures ANOVA with Bonferroni’s post hoc test for time × group comparisons; two-way ANOVA for stimulus × group comparisons; Student’s t-test for two-group comparisons. *P < 0.05, ***P < 0.001, ****P < 0.0001; mean ± s.e.m.

a, b, Relative gene expression by qPCR for confirmatory plasticity genes after treatment of aged NSG mice with young (a; n = 6) or elderly (b; n = 7) human plasma versus vehicle (n = 7) (13.9 ± 0.2 months old). c, Representative dentate gyrus images from aged NSG mice treated intravenously with human cord (n = 8 mice), young (n = 7 mice), or elderly (n = 7 mice) plasma or vehicle (n = 7 mice), highlighting c-Fos-positive cells (arrowheads; scale bar, 100 μm; quantification in Fig. 1e ). d, e, Quantification of c-Fos-positive cells in lateral/basolateral amygdala (d) and retrosplenial/motor cortex (e) in treated NSG mice. f, g, pCREB expression (f; scale bar, 150 μm) and corresponding pCREB intensity quantification (g) in treated NSG mice. h, i, Newborn neurons visualized by doublecortin antibody staining (h; DCX, arrowheads; scale bar, 100 μm) and corresponding quantification (i) in treated NSG mice; (for a–g, 13.9 ± 0.2 months old). j, k, Quantification of TRAPed c-Fos-activated recombined cells (visualized by TdTomato fluorescence) also expressing the pan-neuronal marker NeuN in dentate gyrus (j) and the CA1 subfield of hippocampus (k; overall activation/recombination in CA1 was very low) from cord plasma-treated (n = 4), elderly plasma-treated (n = 3), and vehicle-treated (n = 4) TRAP-FOS mice (8–9.5 months old). l, m, TRAPed c-Fos-activated recombined cells in lateral/basolateral amygdala (l) and retrosplenial/motor cortex (m) in mice from j–k; one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s post hoc test; *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01; NS, not significant; mean ± s.e.m.

a, b, Overlap (arrowheads) of c-Fos (red) and prox1 (green), and Gad67-expressing neurons (blue; arrows) in dentate gyrus from cord plasma-treated (n = 8), young plasma-treated (n = 7), elderly plasma-treated (n = 7), and vehicle-treated (n = 7) NSG mice by confocal microscopy (a) with corresponding counts of c-Fos+prox1+ neurons (b; 13.9 ± 0.2 months old; scale bar, 50 μm). c, The proportion of c-Fos-expressing cells quantified in dentate gyrus that were granule cells (prox1+), suggesting that nearly all the c-Fos+ cells detected in dentate gyrus were granule cells. d, Quantification of the number of c-Fos+Gad67+ (inhibitory neuron) cells in dentate gyrus from human plasma- and vehicle-treated NSG mice. e, Quantification of the number of Gad67+ cells in the dentate gyrus of treated NSG mice. One-way ANOVA with Tukey’s post hoc test; *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01; NS, not significant; mean ± s.e.m.

a, Input–output relationship in dentate gyrus synapses from brain slices taken from vehicle- or cord-plasma-treated aged NSG mice (n = 11 slices from n = 5 cord plasma-treated NSG mice; n = 12 slices from n = 5 vehicle-treated NSG mice; eight intravenous injections; 11.7 ± 0.2 months old), showing no difference in synaptic strength (basal synaptic transmission). b, c, Paired-pulse ratio before (b) and after (c) LTP protocol with various pulse intervals (in c, n = 10 slices per group were measured). d–f, Population spike amplitudes recorded in dentate gyrus granule cell layer by perforant path stimulation in slices from vehicle- or cord plasma-treated young NSG mice (d) with quantification of LTP maintenance phase (e), and input–output relationship (f) in dentate gyrus synapses from the slices (n = 11 slices per group from n = 5 mice per group; eight intravenous injections; 2.5 ± 0.1 months old). g–i, Population spike amplitudes recorded in dentate gyrus granule cell layer by perforant path stimulation in slices from vehicle, young, or elderly human plasma-treated aged NSG mice (g) with quantification of LTP maintenance phase (h), and input–output relationship in dentate gyrus synapses (i) from the slices (n = 10, 11, and 11 slices from 5 mice per group (vehicle-treated, young plasma-treated, and elderly plasma-treated mice, respectively); eight intravenous injections; 12.0 ± 0.1 months old). j, k, Freezing levels for vehicle-treated (n = 9) or cord-plasma-treated (n = 7) aged NSG mice during baseline period (j) and cued fear-conditioning task (k; eight intravenous injections; 12.8 ± 0.2 months old). Student’s t-test for two-group comparisons; one-way ANOVA for h; two-way ANOVA for group × stimulus intensity comparisons (no significant interaction in a, f, i); NS, not significant; mean ± s.e.m.

a, Table of ranked plasma protein changes from protein microarray experiments. Shown in green are top hits of proteins decreasing in plasma in both mouse ageing (3, 6, 12, 18, 24 months) and human ageing (cord, young, elderly) arrays; shown in red are top hits of proteins increasing in plasma of aged mice sharing young blood (versus aged isochronic), while also decreasing in human ageing (cord, young, elderly) arrays. † Candidates selected for recombinant protein injections in aged mice to examine changes in c-Fos+ cell number. *Proteins appearing in both lists. b, Scatter plot of ELISA-based quantification of human plasma CSF2 (n = 15, 19, 16 subjects (left to right)), consistent with plasma elevations in aged mice sharing young blood via parabiosis by protein microarray. c, Number of c-Fos-positive cells in dentate gyrus from aged WT mice treated seven times systemically every other day with 50 μg kg−1 (intraperitoneal) recombinant CSF2 (n = 8 per group; 21-month-old). d, Barnes maze escape latency over 4-day trial time course for separate cohort of aged WT mice (20-month-old) treated systemically (intraperitoneal) eight times every other day with vehicle (n = 14) or 50 μg kg−1 of recombinant CSF2 (n = 15). e, Day 4 Barnes maze acquisition rate for indicated trial intervals. f–h, Baseline freezing levels for the same CSF2- or vehicle-treated cohort in d and e (f), and freezing levels during exposure to previously aversive context (g) or during exposure to a new context chamber with training cues (h). i, Number of treated WT mice from d–h exhibiting nesting behaviour within 24 h of placing intact nestlet under single-housing conditions. j, k, Representative dentate gyrus sections stained with doublecortin antibody (DCX, arrowheads; scale bar, 100 μm) in CSF2-treated versus vehicle-treated aged WT mice from d–i (j) and corresponding quantification of total newborn neuron number in dentate gyrus (k), suggesting that cognitive changes observed in d, e, and g are probably unrelated to neurogenesis changes. One-way ANOVA with Tukey’s post hoc test; two-way repeated-measures ANOVA with Bonferroni’s post hoc test for time × group comparisons; Student’s t-test for two-group comparisons; χ 2 analysis for i. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ****P < 0.0001; mean ± s.e.m.

a, b, Representative immunoblot detecting TIMP2 from equal volumes of 1-month-old (n = 8), 3-month-old (n = 7), and 20-month-old (n = 8) WT mouse plasma with corresponding Ponceau S stain (a) and quantification (b). c, d, Representative immunoblot detecting TIMP2 and neuron-specific enolase loading control from hippocampal lysates (80 μg) from 1-, 12- and 20-month-old WT mice (c) with corresponding quantification (d; n = 7 per group). e, Representative confocal microscopy images from WT or TIMP2 KO mice demonstrating specificity of TIMP2 signal (green) in dentate gyrus (n = 4 mice per group; 3-month-old male mice; white arrowheads indicate TIMP2+ cells; scale bar, 100 μm). f, Representative confocal microscopy images showing TIMP2 (green), Iba1 (blue), and NeuN (red) staining in dentate gyrus/hilus of WT mice at various ages (C57Bl/6; National Institute on Aging colony; 1-month-old (n = 8), 2-month-old (n = 8), 6-month-old (n = 6), 12-month-old (n = 8), and 20-month-old mice (n = 9); scale bar, 100 μm). g, h, Quantification of TIMP2+Iba1+ cells (g) or TIMP2+ cells lacking Iba1 or NeuN staining (h) in the dentate gyrus/hilus of mice from f. i, Mean signal intensity per TIMP2+ cell for all counted cells within dentate gyrus/hilus in mice from f. j, NeuN+ cell counts per dentate gyrus/hilar area in the indicated ages. k, l, c-Fos-positive cell counts within dentate gyrus from WT mice treated once (k) or four times (l) with different rTIMP2 doses (n = 8 per group; 21-month-old). m, 64Cu-labelled BSA and 64Cu-labelled TIMP2 detected in blood of 21-month-old WT mice euthanized at the indicated time points following an injected dose of 64Cu-labelled BSA (n = 4 mice per time point (n = 3 mice at 24 h)) or 64Cu-labelled TIMP2 (n = 5 mice per time point). n, First-order elimination kinetics of 64Cu-labelled TIMP2 levels were analysed to approximate its blood half-life (curved line indicates confidence interval). o, Ex vivo autoradiography assessment of 64Cu-labelled TIMP2 localization in coronal or sagittal (right-most) brain sections from injected mice (top) with corresponding Nissl staining (middle) and 64Cu-labelled TIMP2/Nissl overlay to examine anatomical co-registration with radioactive signal (colour bar indicates radioactive signal from low (black) to high (white); n = 3 per group; ~20-month-old WT mice). p, Representative analytical high-performance liquid chromatography radioactivity chromatogram from mouse brain homogenates to assess stability of 64Cu-labelled TIMP2 24 h after injection. Dotted line corresponds to retention time of 11.5 min (n = 2 per group; ~20-month-old WT mice). q, Ultraviolet absorbance at 280 nm measured for TIMP2–DOTA before injection in vivo, exhibiting identical retention time as in m. r, Number of c-Fos+ cells in dentate gyrus from aged (21-month-old) WT mice treated seven times systemically every other day with vehicle (n = 8) or 50 μg kg−1 (intraperitoneal) recombinant TIMP2 (n = 7). s, t, Freezing levels for vehicle- or TIMP2-treated aged WT mice during baseline period (s) and during cued fear-conditioning task (t; n = 15 per group; eight intraperitoneal injections; 20-month-old). See Supplementary Fig. 1 for uncropped blot images. One-way ANOVA with Tukey’s post hoc test; two-way ANOVA with Bonferroni’s post hoc test for group × time comparisons; Student’s t-test for two-group comparisons. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ****P < 0.0001; NS, not significant; mean ± s.e.m.

a, b, Representative dentate gyrus sections stained with doublecortin antibody (DCX, arrowheads; scale bar, 100 μm) in vehicle- or TIMP2-treated WT mice (a) and corresponding quantification (b) of total newborn neuron number in dentate gyrus (n = 15 mice per group; 20-month-old). c, Input–output relationship in dentate gyrus synapses from hippocampal slices taken from vehicle- or TIMP2-treated WT mice (n = 10 slices per group from n = 5 mice per group; eight intraperitoneal injections; 20-month-old), showing no difference in synaptic strength (basal synaptic transmission); mean ± s.d. d, e, Population spike amplitudes recorded in dentate gyrus granule cell layer after perforant path stimulation in slices from TIMP2 KO or WT mice (d) and quantification (e) of LTP maintenance phase (n = 10 slices per group from n = 5 mice per group; 2-month-old mice). f, g, Population spike amplitudes recorded in dentate gyrus granule cell layer after perforant path stimulation in TIMP2 KO slices incubated with the indicated ex vivo treatments (f) and quantification (g) of LTP maintenance phase (n = 8 slices (control IgG incubations) from n = 4 mice; n = 10 slices (anti-TIMP2 IgG incubations) from n = 5 mice; 2- to 3-month-old sex-matched mice); Student’s t-test for two-group comparisons; *P < 0.05; NS, not significant; mean ± s.e.m.

a, b, Baseline freezing levels (a) and cued fear-conditioning freezing levels (b) in young WT mice treated with anti-TIMP2 IgG or control IgG (60 μg kg−1) for 2 weeks (n = 15 per group; 2-month-old). c, d, Serum metabolite measurements (c) and weekly weights (d) to assess general health and organ function in young WT mice treated for ~4 weeks with anti-TIMP2 IgG or control IgG. e, f, Proportion of trial time spent in centre (e) and velocity in centre (f) during open-field assessment of anxiety-like behaviour in the treated mice. g–i, Velocity in zone outside the centre (g), total trial distance (h), and mean trial velocity (i; centre and outside) during open-field testing. j–m, General activity (j), rearing activity (k), distance travelled (l), and mean trial velocity (m)—all monitored by SMARTCage beam-breaks in a home cage for the treated mice. n, o, Quantification of total newborn neuron number in dentate gyrus (n) with corresponding representative dentate gyrus sections stained with doublecortin antibody (o; DCX, arrowheads; scale bar, 100 μm) in control IgG- or anti-TIMP2 IgG-treated young mice; For d–o, n = 15 mice per group; 2.5-month-old; in c, one serum sample in each group was not submitted for metabolite testing owing to a high degree of haemolysis in these two samples; Student’s t-test; *P < 0.05; NS, not significant; mean ± s.e.m.

a, Table of significant changes (ranked by effect size) in the relative level of plasma proteins in young (3-month-old) TIMP2 KO (n = 13) versus WT (n = 9) mice measured by customized protein microarray. The first two entries represent two different antibodies against TIMP2. b, Mean TIMP2 concentrations determined by ELISA (±s.d. for technical replicates) for cord plasma pre-depletion, or cord plasma after TIMP2 or control depletion. c, Silver-stained gel loaded with elution from beads used for TIMP2 (T2) or control (ctl) depletion. ‘#1’ and ‘#2’ reflect replicate plasma aliquots from the depletion process (see Supplementary Fig. 1 for uncropped gel image). d, e, Baseline freezing levels (d) and cued fear-conditioning freezing levels (e) in aged NSG mice (13.8 ± 0.1 months old) given eight intravenous injections of vehicle (n = 10), TIMP2-depleted cord plasma (n = 8), and IgG control-depleted cord plasma (n = 9). f, g, Proportion of trial time spent in centre (f) and velocity in centre (g) during open-field assessment of anxiety-like behaviour in the treated mice. h–j, Velocity in zone outside the centre (h), total travel distance (i), and mean trial velocity (j; centre and outside) during open-field testing. k–m, General activity (k), distance travelled (l), and mean trial velocity (m) by SMARTCage beam-break monitoring for the treated mice. One-way ANOVA with Tukey’s post hoc test; Student’s t-test for WT versus TIMP2 KO comparisons with q < 0.15; *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, ****P < 0.0001; NS, not significant; mean ± s.e.m.