# Title
ApoE attenuates unresolvable inflammation by complex formation with
activated C1q

# Abstract
ApoE has been implicated in Alzheimer´s disease, atherosclerosis,
and other unresolvable inflammatory conditions but a common mechanism of action
remains elusive. We found in ApoE-deficient mice that oxidized lipids activated
the classical complement cascade (CCC) resulting in leukocyte infiltration of
the choroid plexus (ChP). All human ApoE isoforms attenuated CCC activity via
high-affinity binding to the activated CCC-initiating C1q protein
(K D ~140-580 pM) in vitro ; and C1q-ApoE
complexes emerged as markers for ongoing complement activity of diseased ChPs,
Aβ plaques, and atherosclerosis in vivo . C1q-ApoE
complexes in human ChPs, Aβ plaques, and arteries correlated with
cognitive decline and atherosclerosis, respectively. Treatment with siRNA
against C5 which is formed by all complement pathways, attenuated murine ChP
inflammation, Aβ-associated microglia accumulation, and atherosclerosis.
Thus, ApoE is a direct checkpoint inhibitor of unresolvable inflammation and
reducing C5 attenuates disease burden.

## Introduction
Human Apolipoprotein-E (ApoE) is a polymorphic multifunctional protein
arising from three alleles at a single gene locus. However, a common mode of action
of ApoE in physiology and disease has not been identified 1 – 7 . The human
isoforms of ApoE, i.e. ApoE2, ApoE3, and ApoE4 differ by amino acid residues 112 and
158 located outside of the N-terminal receptor-binding site, yielding proteins with
distinct impacts on tissue homeostasis. Thus, ApoE may act through multiple pathways
depending on its isoform, cellular source, the lipid moieties it binds, and multiple
genetic and environmental risk factors. Notions regarding mechanisms of action of
ApoE include isoform-specific domain-domain interactions 7 ; involvement of lipoprotein receptors 2 , 3 ; effects on
cholesterol efflux 7 ; maintenance of the blood
brain barrier (BBB) 1 , 6 ; and binding extracellular molecules including beta amyloid
peptide and heparan sulfate proteoglycans 2 .
This wide range of activities indicates that ApoE exercises its functions in complex
territorialized tissue contexts. Here, we explored the roles of ApoE in the aging
choroid plexus (ChP), brain, and the aorta of mice and in two major prototypic human
unresolvable diseases, i.e. Alzheimer´s disease (AD) and atherosclerosis. We
chose these diseases, because both have been linked to ApoE: AD is the most common
form of dementia and the ApoE4 isoform predisposes to late onset AD (LOAD) 2 , 3 ; and
atherosclerosis is the leading cause of death worldwide 8 , 9 . Our data indicate
that ApoE is a classical complement cascade (CCC) checkpoint inhibitor by binding to
activated C1q and that the resulting C1q-ApoE complex emerges as a common player to
impact brain inflammation and atherosclerosis.

## Results
We focused on the ChP since the ChP is the major intracranial
neuroimmunological interface which produces the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), forms
the blood-CSF barrier, exchanges signals between the brain and the circulation,
and is the principal gateway for blood-borne leukocytes to infiltrate the
central nervous system in inflammatory and degenerative brain diseases 10 – 14 . ApoE -/- mice develop spontaneous hyperlipidemia when
maintained on normal chow (NC). To distinguish effects of human isoforms of ApoE
and the separate impact of hyperlipidemia, humanized ApoE3-knockin (KI) and
ApoE4-KI where either maintained on NC or on a high fat diet (HFD). Similar
amounts of lipid accumulated in aged ApoE -/- and the HFD ApoE4-KI
ChPs but no lipid accumulated in NC ApoE4-KI or in NC or HFD ApoE3-KI ChPs
although HFD KI mice had similar lipid levels in the circulation ( Fig.1a-c ). These data indicated that lipid
deposits in ChPs developed either in the absence of ApoE or in hyperlipidemic
ApoE4-KI but not in hyperlipidemic ApoE3-KI mice. Lipid deposits colocalized
with leukocytes in ApoE -/- ChPs with the majority of
macrophages/dendritic cells (DCs), which were increased in number by a factor of
~15 ( Fig.1d,e ). ChP leukocytes
( Fig.1f ; extended Fig.1b ), endothelial cells ( Fig.1f ), and epithelial cells ( extended Fig.1a ) accumulated intracellular lipid droplets, as did
the ependymal cells lining the ventricle surfaces ( extended Fig.1b ). The adjacent brain parenchyma underneath the
ependymal cells was also infiltrated by lipid and leukocytes and exhibited signs
of astrocyte activation (not shown). Extracellular lipid increased in
ApoE -/- versus WT ChPs by ~18-fold and also localized at
the luminal side of the epithelial cells ( extended
Fig.1a ). Additionally, high-resolution and transmission electron
microscopy (TEM) revealed leukocytes and macrophages in the CSF attached to the
microvilli at the abluminal side of the ChP (Extended Data Fig. 1c, left and
middle panels); some of the intraventricular macrophages accumulated lipid,
yielding a foam cell-like appearance ( extended
Fig.1c ). These data suggested that macrophages on both sides of the
blood-CSF barrier engulfed lipid. Extracellular lipid provides a pathological
surface for complement activation in other diseases prompting us to consider
complement activation in ChPs. Since extracellular ChP lipid appeared at the
luminal side and the stromal space, we first considered the possibility that
immunoglobulins (Igs) bind to the lipid droplets. In ApoE -/- ChPs,
Igs colocalized with lipid inside the capillary lumen, the stromal space, and
the lipid between the epithelial cells ( Fig.1f ; extended Fig.1d ). These
data show that lipid/Igs accumulate outside of the blood-CSF barrier in the ChP.
Bell et al. previously reported that ApoE-deficiency and transgenic expression
of ApoE4 in NC ApoE4-KI mice were afflicted with BBB breakdown 1 . Igs, which we used as a marker of BBB
breakdown, accumulated in the perivascular space of the lipid-free brain
parenchyma of ApoE -/- and NC or HFD ApoE4-KI mice confirming the
findings of Bell et al. However, there was no statistically discernable
aggravation of BBB dysfunction as a function of hyperlipidemia ( extended Fig.1e ).

In view of the morphological ChP phenotypes in WT, ApoE -/- versus ApoE-KI mice ( Fig.1 ; extended Fig.1 ) we decided to examine
differential ChP gene expression profiles in 6 groups of mice: WT,
ApoE -/- , ND or HFD-fed ApoE3-KI, and NC or HFD-fed ApoE4-KI mice.
For this purpose, laser capture microdissection-based MIAME-compliant
microarrays ( http://www.ncbi.nih.gov/geo ; the NCBI omnibus (GEO); accession
no: GSE85774 and GSE85775) from ChPs of various mouse groups were examined. 241
differentially expressed ChP genes in the 6 transcriptomes were identified in
gene ontology (GO) terms immune system process , transcription factor binding , cell
junction , and ATP binding ( extended Fig.1f ; supplementary Tabl.1 ). In ApoE -/- ChPs, the
majority (81%) of differentially expressed genes were down-regulated when
compared to WT ChPs ( Fig.1g ); surprisingly,
however, 58% (7/12) of upregulated genes were interferon (IFN)-related genes
with none downregulated ( Fig.1g ). NC ApoE4
replacement ChPs further induced (44%, 22/50) IFN-related genes ( Fig.1g ). Multiple two-group comparisons
revealed a pronounced ApoE4-specific ChP IFN signature ( Fig.1g ; supplementary Tabl.2 ). The biological activities of the IFN-related
genes range from regulation of autoimmunity by macrophages and DCs to BBB
integrity including IFN-induced protein with tetratricopeptide repeats 3 and 1
( ifit3, ifit1 ), ubiquitin-specific peptidase 18
( usp18 ), guanylate-binding protein 3
( gbp3 ), interferon-induced protein 44 ( ifi44 ),
receptor transporter protein 4 ( rtp4 ), IFN-regulatory factor 7
( irf7 ), and interferon, alpha-inducible protein 27 like 2A
( ifi27l2a ) ( Fig.1h ).
These data provided evidence for a detrimental and isoform-specific impact of
ApoE4 in ChP homeostasis as ChP IFN has been associated with cognitive
decline 15 . Moreover, several genes
that were down-regulated in ApoE -/- ChPs were rescued in their
ApoE-KI counterparts indicating phenotypic ChP changes specific for
ApoE-deficiency ( extended Fig.1g ). In
addition, complement genes were observed to be up-regulated in
ApoE -/- ChPs ( Fig.2 ; extended Fig.2 ; supplementary
Tabl.3 ).

It is well recognized that oxidation-specific epitopes in extracellular
lipid bind Igs and activate complement 16 , 17 and complement
activation results in surface opsonization by C3b, generation of locally acting
anaphylatoxins, i.e. C3a and C5a, and subsequent recruitment of leukocytes and
tissue inflammation 18 . We hypothesized
that the lipid deposits in ApoE -/- ChPs bind Igs with resultant
activation of complement. Igs, C3, C3a, and C5 were evident together with lipid
in ChPs of ApoE -/- but not in WT mice ( Fig.2a,b ). The CCC-initiating C1q molecule and C4 colocalized with
ChP lipid deposits (extended Fig.2a ). Most
complement constituents are produced by the liver and released into the
circulation as inactive components or they can be produced locally in tissues.
Whereas several complement components were significantly expressed in the ChP,
C5 transcripts were below the threshold level in ChP transcriptomes, indicating
that ChP C5 was largely serum/liver-derived (not shown). To examine whether ChP
lipid-triggered CCC activation participates in leukocyte infiltration, we chose
to specifically target liver-derived C5 using a small interference RNA (siRNA)
that is exclusively taken up by the liver using an asialoglycoprotein
receptor-specific tag, i.e. N-acetylgalactosamine- (GalNAc) C5-siRNA ( Fig.2c ). Liver C5 siRNA knockdown in
ApoE -/- mice led to a large decrease of circulating C5 levels
( Fig.2c ) without affecting blood
lipoprotein concentrations or body weight or circulating leukocytes (not shown).
Liver-targeted C5 silencing also resulted in substantial decrease of C5 protein
deposits in the ChP ( extended Fig.2b ) and
significantly attenuated CD45 + leukocyte-, CD68 + macrophage-/DC-, and CD3 + T cell infiltration in ApoE -/- ChPs ( Fig.2d-f ). In contrast, IgG, C4, and
C3 deposition were much less affected ( extended
Fig.2b,c ). These data demonstrated that lipid-triggered complement
cascade activation promoted ChP leukocyte infiltration. However, C3 and C4 were
present at much lower levels in HFD ApoE4-KI ChPs vs ApoE -/- ChPs ( Fig.2g )
despite similar amounts of ChP lipid (parallel sections from Fig.1c ) and respective serum C3 and C5 levels
( extended Fig.2d ) indicating that the
presence of ApoE in the ChP prevented the marked complement cascade phenotype of
ApoE -/- ChPs. ApoE colocalized with Igs and C1q ( extended Fig.2e ; Fig.2h ). Using an unbiased gene expression approach, i.e.
expression microarrays, we examined all complement-related genes signatures in
ChPs. We identified 6 transcripts encoding CCC-specific constituents
( c1qa , c1qb , c1qc , c2 , c3ar1, C1ra ) which were selectively
upregulated in ChPs of ApoE -/- as compared to WT mice ( Fig.2i , extended Fig.2f ). Subsequent to CCC activation, C3b (cleavage
product of C3) will initiate a constitutive amplification loop of the
alternative complement cascade. Factor H (alternative complement pathway
inhibitor) mRNA was detectable without differences between groups ( extended Fig. 2g ), factor B and MASP1
(components of the alternative and lectin pathways of complement activation)
transcripts were below threshold levels. However, factor H protein accumulation
was observed on lipid deposits of both ApoE -/- and HFD ApoE4 ChPs
( extended Fig.2h ), indicating the
presence of a C3b-initiated amplification loop that recruited factor H in both
groups of mice. Interestingly, C1qa and C1qc transcripts were rescued in ApoE-KI vs ApoE -/- ChPs
( Fig.2i ) and various complement
regulators were expressed in ApoE -/- and ApoE-KI ChPs ( extended Fig.2f ). Taken together, these data
revealed pronounced CCC activation in ApoE -/- but not in HFD ApoE3-KI
and less in HFD ApoE4-KI mice. In addition, we found that ApoE mRNA ranges in
the top 50 of ~14 000 genes expressed in WT ChPs indicating that ApoE is
expressed at extraordinarily high levels in normal ChPs ranging in an expression
range of > 99 % of all expressed ChP genes ( supplementary
Tabl.4 ).

The salient absence or low expression of key complement components in HFD
ApoE4-KI ChPs led us to examine a role of ApoE in the classical, alternative,
and lectin pathways 18 . ApoE was added to
normal human serum (NHS), which was activated by pathway-specific buffers,
incubated with non-human erythrocytes and lysis of erythrocytes was determined.
All three variants, i.e. ApoE2, ApoE3, and ApoE4 reduced CCC activation but not
the alternative pathway ( Fig.3a ).
Furthermore, in a complement-mediated killing assay, E. coli remained viable upon ApoE-supplemented NHS challenge, but were killed when
complement was activated via the lectin- or alternative pathways ( Fig.3b ), indicating that ApoE inhibits CCC
activity, but not the alternative or lectin pathways. All three ApoE isoforms
inhibited deposition of C4b and the terminal complement complex (TCC) by
~80% ( Fig.3c ), showing that ApoE
acts early in CCC activation. Oxidized-LDL (oxLDL) has been reported to activate
the CCC 19 ; and we found that purified C1q
indeed bound malondialdehyde-modified low-density-lipoprotein (MDA-LDL) and
oxidized-LDL (oxLDL) but not native LDL ( extended
Fig.3a ). Moreover, ApoE inhibited the CCC and reduced C4b deposition
when the CCC was activated by MDA-LDL ( extended
Fig.3b ). Notably, amyloid fibrils but not soluble amyloid triggered
C3b deposition reflecting complement activation ( extended Fig.3c,d ).

During CCC initiation, C1q is activated by undergoing a conformational
change in a Ca 2+ -dependent manner; proteases C1s and C1r then bind to
the activated C1q, forming the C1 complex followed by cleavage of C2 and C4 to
form the C3 convertase C4b2b 18 . We
incubated ApoE3 with C2 or C4 in the presence of the protease C1s. However,
ApoE3 failed to inhibit C2 or C4 cleavage by C1s ( extended Fig.3e,f ). ApoE3 also lacked co-factor activity for factor
I-mediated degradation of C4b ( extended
Fig.3g ). ApoE binding to complement proteins revealed strong binding
to C1 and C1q, but not to C1r, C1s, C2, C3, C3b, or C4 ( Fig.3d ; extended
Fig.4a,b,c ). ApoE also bound factor H ( extended Fig.4c ), extending an earlier report of factor H binding to
ApoE on plasma high density lipoprotein 20 . However, ApoE did not inhibit the alternative complement pathway
( Fig.3a,b ). All three recombinant ApoE
isoforms and serum-derived ApoE3 bound C1 and C1q ( extended Fig.4d,e ). Binding of C1q to immobilized ApoE was
further confirmed ( extended Fig.4f ). We
determined the strength of the interaction. All ApoE isoforms bound to C1q and
equilibrium dissociation constants ranged from ~140-580 pM ( Fig.3e ; supplementary Tabl.5 ).
The interaction with C1q was specific, as ApoE did not bind to mannan-binding
lectin (MBL), a protein initiating the lectin pathway and sharing structural and
functional features with C1q ( extended
Fig.4g ). Likewise, apolipoprotein A did not interact with C1q ( extended Fig.4h ). C1q-ApoE complex formation
was further confirmed by a proximity ligation assay (PLA) on cultured human
apoptotic cells ( extended Fig.4i ). ApoE
isoforms bound to C1q in a Ca 2+ -dependent manner ( Fig.3f ) and EGTA reduced the binding of ApoE
to C1q ( extended Fig.5a ), indicating that
ApoE selectively binds to the activated form but not the inactivate form of C1q.
Activated C1q, but not the inactive serum C1q co-immunoprecipitated ApoE and vice versa ( extended
Fig.5b-c ), suggesting C1q-ApoE complexes are not present in
serum.

To determine the binding site in ApoE to C1q, ApoE peptides were
generated and examined for their ability to reduce ApoE4-mediated CCC inhibition
( Fig.4a ). ApoE peptide
P 139-152 but not P 30-40 , P 74-85 , or
P 210-232 , abrogated CCC inhibition by ApoE4 ( Fig.4b ) though P 139-152 alone did not inhibit CCC
activity (not shown). Analyzing binding of the four ApoE peptides to C1q
revealed binding of P 139-152 to C1q, but not of peptides
P 30-40 , P 74-85 , or P 210-232 ( Fig.4c ). Also, P 139-152 , but not
P 30-40 competed with ApoE3 for binding to C1q ( extended Fig.5d ). The dissociation constant
K D of P 139-152 to C1q as assessed by MicroScale
thermophoresis was ~500 pM ( Fig.4d ).
These data imply that the C1q binding site in ApoE is located between residues
139-152, which also harbors the LDL-receptor (LDLR) binding site (136-150) 21 . However, different binding forces for
the LDLR and C1q in ApoE were indicated by the observation that C1q-ApoE
interaction was strongly reduced by SDS, but not by NaCl, while LDLR-ApoE
interaction was affected by NaCl, but not by SDS ( Fig.4e ). The influence of SDS on antibody binding was excluded
( extended Fig.5e ). Thus, ApoE binding
to C1q was mediated by hydrophobic forces. Moreover, LDLR did not compete off
C1q-ApoE binding ( extended Fig.5f ),
indicating that LDLR and C1q do not share the same binding site in ApoE. As
monitored by electron microscopy, gold-labeled ApoE and gold-labeled
ApoE 139-152 peptide revealed binding to the C1q stalk but not to
the globular heads which mediate target binding ( Fig.4f ). C1sC1r tetramers also bind to the C1q stalk 22 . However, ApoE and the C1sC1r tetramers
do not share the same binding site in C1q, because the C1q-ApoE3 interaction was
unaffected by C1sC1r tetramers in competition assays ( extended Fig.5g ). These data revealed that ApoE acts as a
specific CCC inhibitor by high-affinity binding to activated C1q at
physiological concentrations.

Though ChP lipid deposits have not been reported in AD, we searched for
pathologies in human AD ChPs that may resemble the pathology of
ApoE -/- and HFD ApoE4-KI ChPs. We studied 30 age- and
gender-matched human brains afflicted with various stages of AD-associated
pathologies, i.e. Braak & Braak stages for neurofibrillary tangles
(NFTs) 23 , Thal phase for Aβ
plaque score 24 , and the Consortium to
Establish a Registry for Alzheimer´s Disease (CERAD) for neuritic plaque
(Aß plaque with dystrophic neurites) burden ( supplementary Tabl.6 ).
13/30 patients had no signs of dementia (Braak & Braak 0-III, Thal phase
0-5, CERAD stage 0), whereas 17/30 patients exhibited dementia upon clinical
neurological examination and showed marked AD pathologies (Braak & Braak
IV-VI, Thal phase 1-5, CERAD stage B-C) ( supplementary Tabl.6 ). Surprisingly, 29 of the 30 brains
showed various degrees of ChP lipid deposits that were strikingly similar to
those found in ApoE -/- and HFD ApoE4-KI ChPs ( Fig.5a ). Notably, demented AD cases revealed higher rates of
lipid in ChPs vs non-dementia cases ( Fig.5a ). Moreover, the burden of ChP lipid deposits
correlated with all AD neuropathologies ( Fig.5b-d ) and the ChP lipid content especially correlated with ApoE4
allele carriers ( Fig.5e ). Unexpectedly,
ApoE3/ApoE3 demented AD cases also had a significantly higher rate of ChP lipid
positive areas when compared to ApoE3/ApoE3 non-dementia cases ( Fig.5f ). We next examined whether lipid
deposits in human ChPs was associated with complement proteins and inflammation.
ChP lipid colocalized with C1q, ApoE, and complement C3 and C5 ( Fig.5g ; extended Fig.6a,b ). ChP lipid deposits were associated with
intraluminal macrophage infiltration, very similar to mouse ApoE -/- ChPs ( extended Fig.6c,d ). Factor H protein
deposition was observed in both lipid positive and lipid negative ChPs in
dementia cases ( extended Fig.6e ). A major
question that arose from these data was whether the C1q-ApoE complex that we
observed in vitro ( Figs.3 , 4 ) is also formed in vivo . C1q-ApoE complex formation was evaluated using the
proximity ligation assay (PLA) with a resolution power of 10-30nm, comparable to
resonance energy transfer-type technologies 25 and super-resolution STED microscopy was applied in parallel
( Fig.5h ). By PLA, we observed that the
C1q-ApoE complex forms in human ChPs in vivo and that its
density in ChP lipid-rich areas was higher when compared to lipid-free areas
( Fig.5i ).

Complement C1q and ApoE have been observed in human AD plaques. We
examined whether C1q-ApoE complexes can be observed in human AD plaques. C1q,
Aβ, phosphorylated Tau (pTau), as well as C3 colocalized with ApoE ( extended Fig.6f-h ) in brains of human AD.
C1q-ApoE complexes were also observed in human AD plaques ( Fig.5j ). Moreover, Aβ-ApoE complexes but not
ApoE-pTau complexes were observed in AD plaques of demented cases ( Fig.5j ), extending and corroborating findings
that ApoE binds to Aβ but not pTau in vitro 26 . These data add to earlier reports that
ApoE, C1q, and C3 are detectable in human AD plaques by demonstrating the
buildup of the C1q-ApoE and Aβ-ApoE complexes in brains of AD cases with
dementia. We next searched for the C1q–ApoE complex in a mouse model of cerebral
β-amyloidosis (the APPPS1-21 mouse carries mutations in both the APP and
presenilin genes, leading to rapid onset amyloid lesions) 27 . High resolution 3D confocal microscopy of C1q-ApoE
complexes that had been visualized by the PLA assay revealed that the complexes
accumulate inside as well as in the immediate vicinity of
methoxy-X04 + Aβ plaques in APPPS1-21 cortexes ( Fig.5k ; extended data Video1), i.e. the area
of Aβ plaques that show plaque-associated microglia cells accumulation.
Aβ-ApoE complexes were also observed in APPPS1-21 mouse brains. The
majority of Aβ-ApoE complexes located inside X04 + Aβ
plaque ( extended Fig.7a ; extended data
Video2). The presence of C1q-ApoE complexes is a marker for persistent CCC
activity in vivo. We considered the possibility that liver C5
would have inflammatory effects inside the BBB, i.e. the brain parenchyma, and -
by the same token - specifically in AD plaques. For this purpose, we treated
APPPS1-21 mice with liver-specific C5 siRNA. C5 siRNA treatment significantly
reduced serum C5 ( Fig.5i ) and the number
and density of Aβ plaque-associated microglia cells ( Fig.5m ) and of Aβ plaque-associated LAMP1 ( extended Fig.7b ). C5 siRNA also reduced the
percentage of intermediate-sized plaque volumes though the total plaque load was
unchanged under these experimental conditions ( extended Fig.7c-d ). These data show that C5 cleavage contributes to
Aβ pathology. In addition, C1q-ApoE complexes were observed in 8 weeks
old (adolescent) WT brain cortexes ( extended
Fig.7e ). As the complex only forms under conditions of activated C1q
(see above), these data indicate that the C1q-ApoE complex may play a
physiological role in normal brain homeostasis.

Our data raised the possibility that other unresolvable human diseases
showed similar pathological hallmarks that we identified in ApoE -/- ChPs in mice and human and mouse AD brains. We examined complement pathways
during the early stages of atherosclerosis in ApoE -/- mice. When we
mined gene expression signatures in WT vs ApoE -/- aortas 28 , we found 9 complement pathway-related
transcripts (largely CCC-related) to be >2-fold upregulated during
development of aortic atherosclerosis ( Fig.6a ; extended Fig.8a,b ; supplementary
Tabl.7 ). The impact of CCC on atherosclerosis was examined by C5
siRNA treatment on ApoE -/- mice for 20 weeks ( Fig.6b ). Treatment reduced both thoracic and abdominal
atherosclerosis by ~65% in the total aorta ( Fig.6c ). C5 siRNA reduced aortic root atherosclerosis and decreased
macrophage density in plaques ( Fig.6d-e ),
without affecting blood lipid levels, body weight, or blood leukocyte counts
( extended Fig.8c-g ). We next evaluated
C1q-ApoE complexes in human carotid atherosclerosis. Five healthy control
arteries on autopsy (type 0-I; American Heart Association classification 29 ), six early (type II-III) and nine
advanced atherosclerotic plaques (type V-VII) ( supplementary Tabl.8 )
from carotid endarterectomy specimens were stained for CD68 + macrophages/DCs, C1q, ApoE, and C5 ( Fig.6f ). CD68 + macrophages, and C1q, ApoE, and C5 protein
deposits increased in early and advanced plaques when compared to control
arteries ( Fig.6g ). C1q and ApoE
co-localized in atherosclerotic plaques as determined by STED microscopy ( extended Fig.8h ). The C1q-ApoE complex
emerged as a marker of CCC activity in atherosclerotic plaques ( Fig.6h ). However, although both C1q and ApoE
were expressed in the uninflamed media layer of human carotid atherosclerotic
arterial wall, no C1q-ApoE complexes were detectable there ( Fig.6g-h ). Malondialdehyde-epitopes (MDA2) were observed on
the surface of lipid deposits within plaques ( Fig.6i ).

## Discussion
We identified a CCC activity-regulating C1q-ApoE complex in diseased ChPs,
AD plaques, and atherosclerotic arteries. As ApoE qualifies as a checkpoint
inhibitor of the CCC via formation of the C1q-ApoE complex, our data directly tie
ApoE to the regulation of the immune system and identify its mechanism of
action.

The CCC is triggered by activation of C1q which can be established by
multiple mechanisms in diverse sets of physiological and pathophysiological
states 30 – 34 . The widespread range of C1q activators illustrates the
ubiquitous actions and central position of the CCC to maintain tissue homeostasis
and - more specifically - to respond to bacterial infection by activating the innate
immune system 31 , 32 , 34 . However,
inappropriate control of the CCC causes its malfunction, injurious tissue
inflammation, and disease ( Fig.6j ) 32 , 34 .
That ApoE may be indispensable for CCC regulation is indicated by the marked
pathologies of the ChP and of atherosclerosis in ApoE -/- mice and by the
observation that the disease burden can be reduced by C5 siRNA in peripheral tissues
and the brain in experimental models as varied as ApoE -/- and APPPS1-21
mice. The salient expression of C1q-ApoE complexes in ChPs, AD plaques and
atherosclerotic lesions are indicative on ongoing complement activity suggesting
multiple therapeutic targets such as the complex itself, their downstream
constituents and their corresponding receptors on immune cells 32 , 34 – 37 .

The two binding partners of the complex, i.e. C1q and ApoE, have previously
been viewed as separately acting molecules 30 , 38 – 45 to perform independent tasks in numerous
tissue contexts ( extended Fig.9a ). Indeed, in
addition to being involved in bona fide complement pathways,
complement constituents have recently been recognized to impact non-canonical events
outside of the innate arm of the complement cascade-guided immune system such as
regulating inflammasomes or skewing the immune system 32 , 34 , 46 . Moreover, the Janus-headed natures of both C1q and ApoE
become often apparent only in distinctive tissue contexts where they are either
beneficial or detrimental 30 , 38 – 45 . Our data suggest that at least some pathologies previously thought
to reflect single actions of C1q or ApoE may in fact involve C1q–ApoE complexes
( extended Fig.9a ). We believe that the
roles of C1q-ApoE complexes in vivo deserve to be considered
prudently: The in vitro data demonstrate that ApoE is a checkpoint
inhibitor of CCC activity, and our genetic, pharmacological and clinical
translational studies provide evidence that the C1q-ApoE complex is also active in vivo ( Fig.6j ; extended Fig.9b ). More work is needed to further
evaluate the role of the complex versus the single actions of each C1q and ApoE in
multiple experimental and human disease conditions. Such studies would require a
better understanding not only of the domain structures of each C1q and ApoE as
prototypic multidomain-binding molecules but a more precise understanding of the
amino acid binding sequences in ApoE to form a complex with C1q. As most if not all
chronic inflammatory diseases are associated with activation of one or more
complement pathways and C1q and ApoE are locally induced in response to multiple
types of stress, our hypothesis that activated C1q initiates formation of the
complex with resultant CCC-dependent physiological/beneficial or - if the CCC
becomes persistently activated - disease-associated inflammation, deserves future
attention in both basic and clinical studies.

AD and atherosclerosis share risk factors 47 while the second most common form of dementia, i.e. vascular
dementia, has been closely related to LOAD: The incidence of AD is greatly enhanced
in patients with both atherosclerosis and the ApoE4 allele consistent with common
mechanisms of disease progression 48 . Our
suggestion that the C1q-ApoE complex forms an active disease-relevant regulatory
module is consistent with the frequent occurrence of autoimmune diseases or immune
deficiencies in patients afflicted with genetic absence or loss of function
mutations in C1q, C2, C4, and other components of the CCC and with the
identification of both C1q and ApoE as major players in LOAD and atherosclerosis in
genetic association studies 49 , 50 .

## Methods
C57BL/6J WT and ApoE -/- mice were purchased from the Jackson
Laboratories and housed in the animal facilities of Jena and Munich
Universities. WT and ApoE -/- were fed a standard rodent chow under
pathogen free conditions. ApoE3 knock-in (ApoE3-KI) and ApoE4-KI mice on C57BL/6
background were purchased from Taconic, USA 51 , and maintained in the animal facility of Jena University under
mouse chow or fed a high fat cholate-containing diet (Altromin, Germany)
containing 15.8 % fat, 1.25 % cholesterol, and 0.5 % sodium cholate. The diet
was started at the age of 62 weeks and continued for 16 weeks. APPPS1-21
mice 27 were studied in collaboration
with Mathias Jucker, Hertie Institute for Clinical Brain Research, University of
Tübingen. Animal procedures were approved by Regierung Oberbayern
according to guidelines of the local Animal Use and Care Committee and the
National Animal Welfare Laws.

All cases were collected and provided by the Neurobiobank Munich,
Ludwig-Maximilians-University (LMU) Munich according to the guidelines and the
protocols were approved by the ethics committee of Faculty of Medicine, LMU.
ApoE genotype was determined by PCR (Ezway PCR kit, Koma Biotech). AD-related
pathologies (neurofibrillary tangles and beta amyloid) were determined according
to the guidelines of the Brain Net Europe Consortium 52 , 53 , the density
of neuritic plaques according to the plaque score modified from CERAD by the
National Institute on Aging 54 . Patient
characteristics are summarized in supplementary Tabl.6 .

Atherosclerotic plaques were obtained from patients with high-grade
carotid artery stenosis (>70%) 55 after carotid endarterectomy. Healthy control carotid arteries were obtained
from the Forensic Medicine Institute (type 0 – I) 29 . Healthy control arteries comprised all three vessel
layers, i.e. the intima, media, and adventitia. Atherosclerotic plaques
consisted mainly of the diseased intima resulting from the surgical intervention
used for plaque excision 56 . The study was
performed according to the Guidelines of the World Medical Association
Declaration of Helsinki. The ethics committee of Faculty of Medicine, Technical
University of Munich (TUM) approved the study and written informed consent for
permission to be included into the Munich Vascular Biobank was given by all
patients. The baseline patient characteristics are summarised in supplementary
Tabl.8 .

Mice were randomly separated into two groups. 5 mg/kg C5 siRNA targeting
the liver (20 mg/ml in PBS) or control siRNA targeting luciferase (20 mg/ml in
PBS) (provided by Alnylam Pharmaceuticals, Inc.) were administered
subcutaneously (s.c.) every two weeks. Serum C5 protein levels were determined
by ELISA. Complement C5-deficient DAB2 mouse serum (provided by Alnylam
Pharmaceuticals, Inc.) was used as negative control for ELISA.

Mouse aortas were prepared and stained by Sudan-IV for en
face atherosclerosis analysis as described previously 57 . The extent of atherosclerotic plaques
was quantified in total aorta, thoracic aorta, and abdominal aorta using ImageJ
software. In addition, plaque sizes were quantified in Oil red O/hematoxylin
stained serial sections of aortic root. Human carotid plaques were segmented in
blocks of 3 to 4 mm, fixed in formalin overnight, decalcified in 0.5 M EDTA (pH
7.2) and embedded in paraffin (FFPE) as described previously 58 , 59 or fresh-frozen in Tissue-Tec (Sakura Finetek) for
immunofluorescent staining of lipid. Hematoxylin-Eosin and Elastic van Gieson
(EvG) staining was performed in order to assess atherosclerosis. Specimens were
divided into early (II-III) and advanced stages of atherosclerosis (V-VII). In
paraffin sections, antisera were first optimised using different dilutions to
determine the best staining results with minimal background. Following primary
antibody incubation, visualization was performed using the LSAB ChemMate
Detection Kit (Dako, Denmark) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. Stained slides were scanned by ScanScope microscope (Leica) to
obtain digital images. All images were prepared as TIF files and quantified by
imageJ software.

For Immunofluorescence staining, tissues were dissected and embedded in
Tissue-Tec (Sakura Finetek), frozen in isopentane, and stored at -80°C.
20 μm whole mouse brain coronal sections or one hemisphere of AD mice
were prepared according to the mouse brain atlas map 60 . Human and mouse brain sections were stained for Oil Red
O for lipid adopted from protocols for atherosclerosis (see above). Total areas
of ChPs and the areas of lipid + areas were determined using
AxioVision Rel 4.6 software (Carl Zeiss) and Leica Application Suite (Leica). AD
mouse brain sections were stained for Methoxy-X04 (Tocris Bioscience) for
Aβ plaque. The total number of Aβ plaques per section or per brain
area were quantified using Leica Application Suite (Leica). Immunofluorescence
staining was performed as previously described 28 , using marker antibodies anti-mouse collagen IV (2150-1470;
AbDSerotec), immunoglobulins (715-166-151; Dianova), immunoglobulin isotype that
do not react with mouse Ig (017-160-006; Dianova), anti-human/mouse C3 (A213,
ComplementTech), anti-human/mouse C3a (A218, ComplementTech), anti-human C5
(A220, ComplementTech), anti-mouse C5 (ab11898, Abcam), isotype for C5 (ab27478,
Abcam), anti-mouse C1q (HM1096BT, Hycult Biotech), anti-human C1q (ab71089,
Abcam), anti-mouse C4 (HM1046, Hycult Biotech), anti-human Factor H (A312,
Quidel), anti-mouse Factor H (HM1119F, Hycult Biotech), anti-human ApoE
(ab52607, Abcam), anti-human ApoE (178479; Calbiochem), anti-mouse ApoE
(ab183597, Abcam), anti-mouse CD68 (FA11; Serotec), anti-human CD68 (EMB11,
DAKO), anti-mouse CD31 (553370; BD PharMingen), anti-mouse iba-1 (019-19741;
WAKO), anti-mouse CD45 (BZL 01145; Biozol), anti-human/mouse cytokeratin (Z0622;
DAKO), anti-human collagen IV (CIV22, DAKO), anti-beta-amyloid (4G8, Biolegend),
anti-phospho-Tau (AT8, Thermofisher), anti-iba1 (polyclonal, WAKO), anti-LAMP1
(1D4B, Abcam), TO-PRO™-3 Iodide (642/661) (T3605, Thermo Fisher
Scientific) or DAPI for DNA. Anti-malondialdehyde (MDA)-lysine epitope antibody
was in-house produced as described previously 17 . Secondary antibodies were used as previously described 61 . For negative controls, stainings were
performed without primary antibodies or isotype controls. Stained sections were
analyzed using a confocal laser scanning microscope (CLSM) 510 META (Carl Zeiss,
Germany) or Leica SP8 3X (Mannheim, Germany). The numbers and areas of microglia
cells (iba1+/To-Pro-3+ cell) within 30 μm and >30 μm were
quantified as described previously 43 . All
images were prepared as TIF files by imageJ or Leica LAS-X (V1.2) software and
exported into Adobe IIIustrator CS6 for figure arrangements.

Protein-protein binding ex vivo was performed by
Duolink® PLA kit (DUO92101 SIGMA). Fresh-frozen human choroid plexus,
brain parenchyma, and carotid artery sections were fixed with 4% PFA for 10 mins
at 4 degrees Celsius (4° C), then blocked with blocking buffer for 30
mins. After washing, sections were stained with rabbit anti-human ApoE (ab52607,
Abcam) and mouse anti-C1q (ab71089, Abcam) or mouse anti-beta-amyloid (4G8,
Biolegend), mouse anti-phospho-tau (AT8, Thermo Fisher) overnight at RT.
APPPS1-21 mouse brain sections were fixed with 4 % PFA, followed with 10 mins
Methoxy-X04 (Tocris Bioscience) staining for Aβ plaque. After washing,
sections were stained with rabbit anti-mouse ApoE (ab183597, Abcam) and mouse
anti-C1q (HM1096BT, Hycult) with no or/and one primary antibody as controls.
Apoptotic THP-1 cells (ATCC® TIB-202™, UV light for 2h) were
seeded onto Poly-L-lysine- (Sigma-Aldrich, Missouri, USA) coated diagnostic
slides, type PTFE (Carl Roth, Karlsruhe, Germany). Cells were incubated in NHS
or C1q-depleted human serum (each 1%) (Complement Technology, Texas, USA) for 30
minutes. Cells were blocked and treated with rabbit anti-ApoE antibody (25
μg/ml) (Acris Antibodies, Herford, Germany), and mouse anti-C1q antibody
(25 μg/ml) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Massachusetts, USA). PLA signal was
detected by Duolink® PLA kit according to manufacturer’s protocol.
Leica confocal microscope (SP8, Leica, Germany) equipped with a 100X oil
objective (NA 1.4) or LSM 710 equipped with ZEN 2011 software were used for
image. 6 fields per each sample were recorded, 3D reconstructions and the number
of PLA signals per volume were performed using LAS-X software package (Leica,
v1.2, Germany). Fluorescence was measured on cultured single cells.

Stock solutions were prepared by dissolving 1 mg BODIPY 493/503
(4,4-difluoro-1,3,5,7,8-pentamethyl-4-bora-3a,4a-diaza-s-indacene; Invitrogen)
in 1 ml ethanol, and stored at -20 °C. Tissue sections were fixed with 3%
PFA, followed by staining with antibodies, then with BODIPY 493/503 (1:1000
dilution with 150mM NaCl buffer) for 10 mins at RT protected from ambient light,
and mounted.

For 3D STED and CLSM microscopy, samples were imaged on a Leica SP8 STED
3X microscope (Leica, Germany) equipped with a 100X oil objective (NA 1.4). A
tunable white light laser source was used to excite fluorophores. Depletion was
performed at 660 nm and 775 nm for Cy3 and Cy5 or Abberior STAR 635P,
respectively. We applied a CLSM sequence prior to the STED sequences for
recording of the DAPI signal. 3D reconstructions were performed using LAS-X
software package (Leica, v1.2, Germany) and ImageJ.

Mice were put down by isofluran and perfused trans-cardiacally for 2
mins with PBS followed by perfusion for 8 mins with freshly prepared 4% PFA + 1%
glutaraldehyde buffer under 120 mm Hg pressure. Brain tissues were immersed in
cacodylate buffer and cut at 400 μm thick sections using a Vibratome
(Leica, VT1000S). After washing three times with cacodylate buffer, a post
fixation with 1 % osmium tetroxide in cacodylate buffer was done according to
previous methods 62 . 0.5
μm 2 sections of areas of interest were selected. 80 nm
ultra-thin sections were cut and stained with lead citrate and examined using an
EM900 (Zeiss) TEM.

Mice were perfused with 200 ml 4 % PFA under 120 mm Hg pressure. Ig was
stained with donkey anti-mouse IgG conjugated CY3 antibody. Collagen IV antisera
were used to label basement membranes of blood vessels. Ig + signals
located in the perivascular space were used to determine BBB integrity. For
quantitative studies, cerebellum was used; 3-4 sections (200 μm interval)
were stained with Ig, vessels with diameter of more than 10 μm
(representing arteries) were used.

LCM and microarray analyses were performed as previously reported 28 , 63 . Brain sections were dissected using the PALM MicroBeam system
(Carl Zeiss MicroImaging). Trizol buffer was used to lyse tissues. RNA
preparation and microarrays were done as reported previously 63 , 64 . cDNA was synthesized, amplified and purified, and the probe was
fragmented (0.5 – 12 μg cRNA), followed by hybridizing for 20 h in
hybridization buffer according to Affymetrix protocols. Arrays were scanned
immediately after staining and scale raw data to 500 and exported for further
analyses.

Microarray data analyses were done as previously reported 63 , 64 . Briefly, signal intensities were calculated from the raw data
and scaled to an array trimmed mean of 500, R and Bioconductor were used in all
further steps. Data were filtered prior to statistical analysis to remove genes
with low expression or without significant changes between groups. Data were
used from two groups and subjected to Student´s t-test. Use of data after
applying filters with more than two groups were subjected to one-factor variance
analysis (ANOVA). Tests with p values P ≤ 0.01 are performed with Benjamini and Hochberg correction for multiple
testing. Microarray data were deposited in the NCBI´s gene expression
omnibus (GEO; accession number GSE85774 and GSE85775 for ChPs, and GSE40156 for
aortas 57 ).

Complement components C2, C3, C3b, C4, C4b, C1q, C1s, Factor H, Factor
I, and C4BP as well as all primary antibodies (anti C1q, A200/3b; anti C2,
A212/18b; anti C3, A213/5a; anti C4, A201/3a; anti factor H, A237/4) were
purchased from Complement Technology. Recombinant ApoE isoforms from BioCat;
plasma-purified ApoE3 from Biopure. ApoE peptides were generated by Peptide 2.0:
ApoE 30-40 LGRFWDYLRWV; ApoE 75-85 YKSELEEQLTPV; ApoE 139-152 SHLRKLRKRLLRDA;
ApoE 210-232 WGERLRARMEEMGSRTRDRLDEV. LDL and malondialdehyde-modified LDL
(MDA-LDL) were from Cell Biolabs, copper oxidized LDL (oxLDL) from Thermo Fisher
(L34357), ApoA from Athens Research&Technology, vitronectin (Vnt) from
Corning. Aβ and Aβ fibrils from GenSript. Recombinant EfB was
expressed as described 65 . Additional
antisera used were: anti-C5b-9 (clone AE11-MO777-Dako), anti C1s
(11951-05011-AssaybioTch), anti ApoE ((178479-Calbiochem), anti ApoE (Merck,
178479), anti LDLR (HB04JL2204-B-SinoBiological), anti Aβ (clone
32A1-Abfrontier), anti goat IgG (13C0836-Sigma Aldrich) and anti rabbit IgG
(13C0529-Sima Aldrich), IgM (120228-Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories).

Alternative pathway haemolysis assays were performed in a total volume
of 100 μl containing 20 % NHS (pooled from healthy human blood donors),
increasing amounts of ApoE, BSA or EfB (each 0.25 – 1.5 μM) and
2x10 7 rabbit erythrocytes (Fiebig-Nährstofftechnik) in
Mg 2+ -EGTA buffer (20 mM HEPES; 144 mM NaCl; 10 mM EGTA; 7 mM
MgCl 2 ; pH 7.4). To analyze inhibition of haemolysis via the
classical pathway, 1% NHS, increasing concentrations of ApoE (0.01 – 1.5
μM) or 0.44 μM ApoE4 plus 0.33 μM ApoE peptide together
with 2x10 7 amboceptor- (Siemens) coated sheep erythrocytes
(Fiebig-Nährstofftechnik) were mixed in gelatine veronal buffer
(GVB ++ ; Complement Technology). After preincubation of the
proteins in NHS for 15´ at 37° C the NHS-protein-mix was added to
the erythrocytes and incubated for additional 30 mins at 37° C. Lysis of
erythrocytes was determined by measuring the amount of hemoglobin in the
supernatants at 414 nm. The results were calculated as haemolysis rate relative
to the level of lysis in absence of ApoE, the latter was set as 100%.

Different amounts of ApoE (0.1 – 1 μM) together with 0.2%
NHS were preincubated for 10 mins at 37° C before adding E.
coli pET200/D-TOPO (1000 cells per sample). After an incubation of
30 min at 37° C cells were plated to a LB-agar plate and cultivated
overnight at 37° C before counting colony forming units. To distinguish
which complement pathway was effected the experiment was performed incubating
ApoE3 with NHS in GVB ++ for all three pathways, with NHS in Mg-EGTA
buffer for the alternative, and with C1q-depleted serum in GVB ++ for
the lectin and the alternative pathways. Bacterial survival w/o adding ApoE was
set as 10 %.

The effect of ApoE on classical complement pathway C4b and C5b-9
deposition was analyzed by ELISA. The classical pathway was activated by coating
either IgM (2 μg/ml) or MDA-LDL (1 μg/ml) to a microtiter plate.
ApoE (0.25 – 2 μM), Vnt (0.5 μM) were preincubated with 1%
NHS in GVB ++ buffer for 15 mins at 37° C and added to coated
plates for 1 h at 37° C. Complement activation with NHS alone was set as
100%.

The influence of ApoE on C1s to cleave C2 and C4 was determined in fluid
phase. ApoE3 (5 and 50 μg/ml) was preincubated with C1s (20 μg/ml)
in GVB ++ buffer for 15 mins at 37° C followed with C2 (10
μg/ml) or C4 (10 μg/ml) for 30 mins at 37° C. C4b cleavage
activity of ApoE was determined by incubating C4b (20 μg/ml) with ApoE3
(5 and 50 μg/ml) or C4BP (20 μg/ml) for 30 mins at 37° C.
C4b cleavage was followed by Western blotting. Cofactor activity of ApoE was
measured by incubating C4b (10 μg/ml) with Factor I (FI) (5
μg/ml), C4BP (20 μg/ml), ApoE3 (10 μg/ml) or combinations
thereof (FI together with C4BP and FI together with increasing amounts of ApoE3
(0.1 – 100 μg/ml)) for 30 mins at 37° C. C4b cleavage was
analyzed by Western Blotting.

Recombinant or plasma-purified ApoE (0.1, 0.4 or 0.5 μM), ApoE
peptides (0.1 μM), IgM (1 μg/ml), LDL, oxLDL, and MDA-LDL (each 1
mg/ml) or gelatin (10 μg/ml) were immobilized in carbonate-bicarbonate
buffer (Sigma) on microtiter plates (F96 Maxisorb, Nunc-Immuno module) overnight
at 4° C. After washing the plate three times with washing buffer (PBS)
containing 0.1% Tween 20) wells were blocked (PBS, 1% BSA, 5% milk) for at least
1 h at 37° C. Coated proteins were incubated for 1 h at 37° C with
C3, C3b, and C1q (0.1 μM) or C1q (0.02– 5.33 nM) or NHS (0.075
– 10%) in GVB ++ buffer. Calcium-dependent binding of C1q to
ApoE was determined by diluting C1q in GVB ++ buffer or in PBS and
adding increasing amounts of EGTA (3 – 12 μM) (Sigma) with a fixed
concentration of C1q (2 or 5 nM) to immobilized ApoE proteins. Binding force was
analyzed incubating C1q or the LDLR (0.1 μM) with or w/o NaCl (0.5 M) or
SDS (1 %) on immobilized ApoE3. C1q, C3, and C3b binding was analyzed by
specific primary antibodies and followed by HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies.
The reaction was developed with TMB (Kementec Diagnostics) or
1,2-phenylenediamine dihydrochloride (OPD tablets, Dako) and the absorbance at
450 nm or 492 nm was recorded.

To verify binding of ApoE peptide 139-152 to C1q, different amounts of
ApoE 139-152 and ApoE 30-40 as a control (6,25 – 100 nM) were incubated
with a constant concentration of C1q (0.6 nM) on immobilized ApoE3 (0.1
μM). Binding of C1q to ApoE3 was analyzed using specific antibodies.
ELISA was performed to investigate whether ApoE competes with the C1sC1r
tetramer for binding to C1q. C1q (0.6 nM) together with different amounts of the
C1sC1r tetramer (1.53–100 nM) in PBS ++ were incubated with 0.1
μM immobilized ApoE3 for 1 h at 37° C. After a washing step C1q
binding to ApoE was determined. 20 nM C1q was incubated with increasing
concentrations of LDLR (0 – 20 nM) to immobilized ApoE, the binding of
ApoE-C1q and ApoE-LDLR was followed by ELISA. Background binding of anti-C1q and
anti-LDLR to immobilized ApoE was set at 0%.

Biolayer interferometry (BLItz™, ForteBio) was used to examine
binding of recombinant ApoE isoforms to C1, C2, C4, C1 complex components C1q,
C1s, C1r, and to MBL and the binding of C1q to ApoA. Biotinylated proteins
(ligands) were coupled to Streptavidin-coated biosensors and different analytes
were added. Streptavidin-coated biosensors (VWR) were hydrated for 10 mins in
PBS with Calcium and Magnesium (PBS ++ , Lonza) before loading 20
μg/ml biotinylated ApoE2, 3 and 4 or ApoA for 120 sec. After a 30 sec
baseline step 45 nm of complement protein analyte was associated for 240 sec to
the sensor followed by a 240 sec dissociation step. For biotinylation ApoE
isoforms as well as ApoA were incubated with biotin (Thermo Fisher Scientific)
for 30 mins at RT. Samples were separated from unbound biotin using Centri Pure
Mini Spin columns (Biotech). Surface plasmon resonance was used to examine the
binding of ApoE (62-1000 nM) to C1q (immobilized to a 5M Biacore Chip) in real
time. Binding of ApoE (1000 nM) was determined upon addition of increasing
amounts of Ca 2+ chelator EGTA (0.1 - 3 mM) in the binding buffer (75
mM Nacl, 5 mM HEPES, 1mM CaCl 2 ).

Affinity constant (K D ), association (k on ), and
dissociation (k off ) constants of ApoE binding to C1q full length
proteins and C1s was determined by BLItz™. Streptavidin-coated biosensors
were hydrated for 10 mins in PBS ++ . Recombinant ApoE2, ApoE3 and
ApoE4, plasma-purified ApoE3 or C1s (each 20 μg/ml) were loaded for 120
sec via biotin onto the sensor. After 30 sec baseline, C1q (0.047 nM –
45.65 nM) or MBL (45.45 nM) was associated for 240 sec followed by a 240 sec
dissociation step. Affinity values were generated by BLItz™ software
analysis as an advanced kinetics experiment using MBL as reference value.
Initial fluorescent analysis (NanoTemper) was used to determine the
K D of the binding between C1q and ApoE 139-152. Alexa 647-labeled
ApoE 136-152 (10 nM) or ApoE 30-40 (30 nM) were incubated with different amounts
of C1q (0.073 – 1196.8 nM) in PBS ++ for 30 mins in the dark.
After 10 mins centrifugation samples were transferred into standard capillaries
and initial fluorescence was measured using a Monolith NT.115Pico (LED power
60%, MST power 20%). To test whether the observed fluorescence changes are due
to a binding event, an SD-test was performed: The three samples with the highest
and the lowest C1q concentration were centrifuged for 10´ at 15000g
before removing the supernatant and adding SD-mix (4 % SDS, 40 mM DTT). After an
incubation step of 5 mins at 95° C samples were transferred to
capillaries and initial fluorescence was measured. The initial fluorescent
analysis v2.0.2 was used to determine the K D .

For co-immunoprecipitation of C1q (Invitrogen, clon 9A7) and ApoE
(Invitrogen, clone 1H4) monoclonal antibodies were bound to protein G-coupled
Dynabeads (Complement Technology). Beads were incubated with purified human ApoE
(Merck) and/or purified C1q (Complement Technology) and/or NHS (2%) or
C1q-deficient serum (dNHS, Complement Technology) (2%). NHS or anti-C1q antisera
with NHS were incubated with no precoated Dynabeads and were used as controls.
Proteins were eluted from the beads with glycine buffer (pH 2.7), separated by
SDS-PAGE and immunoblotted using goat anti C1q antiserum or goat anti ApoE
antiserum and rabbit anti-goat antibody for detection. Purified C1q was added
directly to the first lane of each gel as size marker for Western blot.

To visualize single C1q protein particles by TEM, C1q (5 μg/ml)
was diluted in PBS. In order to gold-label ApoE, biotinylated plasma-purified
ApoE or ApoE 139-152 (20 μg/ml) was incubated with
streptavidin-gold complexes (5 nm gold, British BioCell International Ltd.)
diluted 1:25 in PBS for two hours at RT. C1q (10 μg/ml) was added to the
ApoE-streptavidin-gold solution (1:1 mixture) and incubated under gentle shaking
for two hours at RT. To detect single C1q-ApoE3 complexes by structure, full
length ApoE3 (40 μg/ml) was directly labeled with EM-Grade 6 nm gold
particles (AURION-ImmunoGold Reagents & Accessories, The Netherlands).
The probe (containing ~2 x 10 14 gold particles/ml) was diluted
1:200 in PBS. Carbon-coated grids were hydrophilized by glow discharge at low
pressure in air. Aliquots of C1q alone and C1q-ApoE-streptavidin-gold or
C1q-ApoE3-gold were adsorbed onto hydrophilic, carbon-coated grids for 1 min,
washed twice with ddH 2 O, and stained on a drop of 2% uranyl acetate
in ddH 2 O. Specimens were analyzed with a Zeiss EM902A electron
microscope (Carl Zeiss) operated at 80 kV accelerating voltage, and images were
recorded with a FastScan-CCD-camera 1,024 x 1,024 (TVIPS).

Significant differences between two groups were analyzed by GraphPad
Prism 7 using the two-tailed unpaired Student´s t-test or one-way ANOVA
with multiple testing (Tukey). Values of *p≤0.05, **p≤0.01,
***p≤0.001 were considered statistically significant.

## Extended Data
( a ) Vacuole (Va) represents lipid. Intercellular lipid
(green) between two epithelial cells was quantified. 68 intercellular spaces
from 3 ApoE-/- and 67 intercellular spaces from 3 WT mice were analyzed. Bar
represents 1 µm. ( b ) Lipid in ApoE-/- ChPs by TEM.
Lymphocytes (left panel); macrophages/dendritic cells (DC) (middle panel);
and ependymal cells contain lipid (right panel). Vacuole (Va) represents
lipid. Bar 1 µm; ( c ) ChPs were stained for cytokeratin
(keratin, red) and leukocytes (CD45, green) (left panel); collagen IV
(Co-IV, green) and CD68 (red) (middle panel). TEM shows single
macrophage-foam cell/DCs adjacent to microvilli. Bar 10 µm;
( d ) ChPs were stained with Ig (red) as described in
Methods. Bars 10 µm; ( e ) PFA-perfused brains were
stained for Ig (Ig, red) and blood vessels (Col-IV, green) in the
cerebellum. Perivascular Ig adjacent to blood vessels was quantified as
described in Methods. WT (n = 3 mice); ApoE-/- (n=3); ND ApoE3 (n=3); HFD
ApoE3 (n=3); ND ApoE4 (n=3); HFD ApoE4 (n=3). Bar 10 µm.
( f ) Laser capture microdissection (LCM)-based expression
microarrays of ChPs. Heatmaps show transcript levels in GO terms immune
system process, transcription factor binding, cell junction, and ATP
binding; ( g ) Genes that were down-regulated in ApoE-/- CPs and
rescued either in ApoE3-KI and in ND or HFD ApoE4-KI mice. WT (n = 5 mice);
ApoE-/- (n=4); ND ApoE3 (n=6); HFD ApoE3 (n=6); ND ApoE4 (n=6); HFD ApoE4
(n=6). Data in c,d are representative images from at least 3 biologically
independent mouse samples. Data in a,e,g represent means ± SEM;
two-tailed Student's t-test was applied to a,e,g. Gene names and statistics
in Supplementary Tables
7 .

( a ) ChPs were stained for C1q (red) and C4 (green). Bar
100 µm. ( b ) C5 siRNA treatment blocks C5 protein
deposition in ApoE-/- ChPs; ( c ) ChPs were stained for C3. Ig
represents lipid; ( d ) Serum C3 and C5. Serum C3 and C5 protein
levels were measured by ELISA. ApoE-/-(n = 6 mice), HFD ApoE4 (n=5).
( e ) High resolution confocal microscopy shows
colocalization of ApoE4 (ApoE, red) and Ig (green, represents lipid) in HFD
ApoE4-KI ChPs. ApoE-/- ChPs serve as negative controls for ApoE staining;
( f) Complement regulators are expressed in ChPs. WT (n = 5
mice); ApoE-/-(n=4); ND ApoE3 (n=6); HFD ApoE3 (n=6); ND ApoE4 (n=6); HFD
ApoE4 (n=6). ( g ) ChP Factor H expressed between WT and ApoE-/-
mice. WT (n=5); ApoE-/-(n=4); (h) ChP factor H protein in ChPs. White arrows
indicate lipid positive areas. Data in a,b,c,e,h are representative images
from at least 3 biologically independent mouse samples. Data in d,f,g
represent means ± SEM; Two-tailed Student's t-test was applied to
d,g; one-way ANOVA with Tukey posttest was applied to f; Gene names in Supplementary Table 3 .

( a ) C1q binds immobilized malondialdehyde-modified LDL
(MDA-LDL) and oxLDL but not native LDL or gelatin. ( b ) ApoE
isoforms in NHS were added to MDA-LDL-coated microtiter plates and C4b
deposition was determined by specific antisera.
( c , d ) IgM, MDA-LDL, and Aβ fibrils but not
soluble Aβ activate complement and cause C3b deposition. BSA, gelatin as
negative controls; ( e , f ) ApoE3 was incubated with
either ( e ) C2 or ( f ) C4 in the presence of C1s. C2
and C4 were cleaved to their active forms C2a (α′30) and C4b
(α′83) via C1s as revealed by the cleavage products in Western
blot analyses; ( g ) ApoE3 has no cofactor activity for factor I
in the cleavage of C4b to inactive iC4b. ApoE3 was incubated together with
factor I, C4BP and C4b, and cleavage products were detected by Western blot
analysis as indicated (α′25 and α′13). Full scanned
blot images in e,f,g are available from source data figures. Data in a-d
represent means ± SEM of three independent experiments. Two-tailed
Student's t-test. Data in e,f,g are representative from 3 independent
experiments.

( a ) ApoE isoforms bind to the C1 complex, but not to C4
or C2. Biotinylated ApoE was immobilized on streptavidin-coated sensors and
incubated with C1 complex, C4, C2, or buffer; ( b ) The C1
complex binds to immobilized ApoE isoforms. ( c ) ApoE isoforms
bind to C1 and factor H, but not to C3 or C3b; ( d ) Normal human
serum (NHS)-derived C1 binds to immobilized plasma-purified ApoE3 and to
recombinant ApoE isoforms; ( e ) C1q binds to immobilized
plasma-purified ApoE3 and to all recombinant ApoE isoforms; ( f )
Plasma-purified C1q was coated on a sensor chip (CM5) and plasma-derived
ApoE (62-1000 nM) was injected into the fluid phase (75 mM NaCl, 5 mM HEPES,
1 mM CaCl2). ( g ) Mannose-binding lectin (MBL) does not bind to
C1q as determined by biolayer interferometry; ( h )
Apolipoprotein A (ApoA) does not bind to C1q as determined by biolayer
interferometry. ( i ) C1q-ApoE complexes revealed by proximity
ligation assay (PLA) on cultured human apoptotic cells (THP-1) were
detectable when treated with NHS but not with C1q-depleted serum (dNHS).
Data represent mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) ± SEM of 16 cells
for each group. Bar 10 µm. Data in b,c,d,e represent means ±
SEM of at least three independent experiments. Data a,f,g and h represent
means of at least two independent experiments. Two-tailed Student's
t-test.

( a ) ApoE-C1q interaction is dependent on Ca2+.
Real-time binding of ApoE to C1q was followed using biosensor analyses.
Binding of ApoE to C1q is reduced in a dose-dependent manner upon increasing
amounts of EGTA (0.1–3 mM); ( b - c )
co-immunoprecipitation of C1q-ApoE complexes; ( b ) anti C1q
antiserum precipitate C1q-ApoE complexes composed of purified proteins with
activated C1q, but not with inactive C1q from NHS. ( c )
Anti-ApoE antiserum precipitates C1q-ApoE complexes but no complexes from
NHS. C1q-ApoE complexes were eluted with glycine buffer, then, C1q or ApoE
proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and immunoblotted using goat anti-C1q
antiserum (left panel of b and c) or goat anti ApoE antiserum (right panel
of b) separately. Full scanned blot images in b,c are available from source
data figures. ( d ) ApoE peptide 139 – 152 but not ApoE
peptide 30 – 40 competes with immobilized ApoE3 for binding to C1q in
a dose-dependent manner; ( e ) C1q antibody binding to C1q is not
affected by SDS. ( f ) C1q and LDLR bind simultaneously to ApoE.
20 nM C1q was incubated with increasing concentrations of LDLR to
immobilized ApoE and binding of C1q and LDLR was followed by ELISA.
Background binding of anti C1q and anti LDLR antisera to immobilized ApoE
were set as 0%; ( g ) ApoE does not compete with C1sC1r tetramers
for binding to C1q. C1q in addition to increasing amounts of C1sC1r
tetramers was added to immobilized ApoE3 and C1q binding was determined.
Data in d-g represent means ± SEM of at least three independent
experiments. Two-tailed Student's t-test. Data in a,b,c are representatives
of 3 independent experiments.

( a - b ) Human ChP sections were stained for
C1q (green) / C3 (red) ( a ) and C1q (green) / ApoE (red)
( b ); ( c - d) ChP sections were
stained for CD68+ macrophages/DCs ( c ) and collagen IV (Col-IV)
to mark basement membranes. Phase contrast shows lipid deposits in ChPs;
( e ) ChP sections were stained for ApoE (green) and factor H
(red); no primary antibody as control (NA). ( f - g )
human brain sections were stained for Aβ (green) / ApoE (red) (left
panels), Tau phosphorylation (pTau, green) / ApoE (red) (middle panels), and
C1q (green) / ApoE (red) (right panels) (f). Blue for nuclei. No primary
antibody as control ( g ); ( h ) brain parenchyma
sections were stained for C3 (red) / ApoE (green). Bar 100 µm for
a-h; Data in a-h are representative images from at least 3 biologically
independent samples.

( a )16 weeks APPPS1-21 mouse brain sections were stained
with Aβ/ApoE complexes (red) by PLA, methoxy X04 for Aβ plaque
(blue). High resolution confocal images show the spatial location of
Aβ-ApoE complexes and Aβ plaque in 3D view (lower panel). Bars
represent 10 µm. ( b ) Brain sections were stained with
methoxy-X04, ApoE, and LAMP1; the size of areas covered by methoxy-X04,
ApoE, and LAMP1 was determined. ApoE/X04 and LAMP1/X04 (X04 > 150
µm2) were quantified. n = 123 plaques from 4 control mice, 147
plaques from 5 treated mice. Bars 100 µm. ( c ) Aβ
plaque was stained with methoxy X04 (X04). Number of plaques per section and
number of plaque per area were quantified. control (n=4 mice), C5 (n=5). Bar
1000 µm; ( d ) Total plaque volume was determined in 3D,
plaques were further grouped according to the plaque volume. n = 71 random
fields from 4 control mice, 88 fields from 5 C5 treated mice. Bar 100
µm; ( e ) 8-week old C57BL6 brain cortex sections were
examined for the presence of C1q-ApoE complexes with methoxy X04. ApoE, or
C1q only antisera were used as negative controls. Bar represents 10
µm. Data in a,e are representative images from at least 3
biologically independent mouse samples. Data in b,c,d represent means
± SEM; two-tailed Student's t-test was applied to b,c,d; Two-way
ANOVA was applied to c,d.

( a ) Expression microarray analyses of aortas. Heatmaps
show GO terms leukocyte migration, complement activation, phagocytosis, and
cellular response to lipid. 6 weeks WT (n=3 mice); 32 weeks WT (n=3); 6
weeks ApoE-/- (n=3); 32 weeks ApoE-/- (n=3); ( b ) aorta
alternative complement pathway genes (factor B, factor H, factor D) mRNA
expression in 6 weeks and 32 weeks old WT and ApoE-/- mouse aortas. 6 weeks
WT (n=3 mice); 32 weeks WT (n=3); 6 weeks ApoE-/- (n=3); 32 weeks ApoE-/-
(n=3); ( c - d ) plasma cholesterol and body weight;
( e - f ) blood leukocytes and percentage. For
c-f, control (11 mice); C5 siRNA (12 mice). ( g ) blood CD4+ T
cells, CD8+ T cells, and B220+ B cells by flow cytometry. Control (6 mice);
C5 siRNA (6 mice). ( h ) super-resolution microscopy shows
colocalization of C1q (green) and ApoE (red) in human atherosclerotic
plaque. Representative images from at least 3 biologically independent mouse
samples. Bar 5 µm. Data in b,c,d,e,f,g represent means ± SEM;
Two-tailed Student's t-test was applied to c.d.e.f.g; one-way ANOVA with
Tukey posttest was applied to b; abbreviations: WBC, white blood cells; RBC,
red blood cells; PLT, platelets; LYM, lymphocytes; MO, monocytes; GRA,
granulocytes. Gene names and statistics in supplementary Table 8 .

( a ) Pleiotropic impacts of single ApoE or single C1q
molecules in brain as reported by others. Microglia cells are the major
source of brain C1q. In response to Aβ plaques, resting microglia cells
differentiate into plaque-associated microglia cells. Single actions of ApoE
and C1q have been reported to be involved in multiple pathways as indicated
in the Figure. Inactive C1q (yellow), activated C1q (red). ( b )
Graphical presentation of the body of in vivo data. Three types of
unresolvable inflammatory conditions were studied in 7 mouse models and in
translational studies of human tissues, i.e. choroid plexus, aorta, and
brain parenchyma.