# Title
Genome-wide meta-analysis identifies new loci and functional pathways
influencing Alzheimer’s disease risk

# Abstract
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is highly heritable and recent studies
have identified over 20 disease-associated genomic loci. Yet these only explain
a small proportion of the genetic variance, indicating that undiscovered loci
remain. Here, we performed a large genome-wide association study of clinically
diagnosed AD and AD-by-proxy (71,880 cases, 383,378 controls). AD-by-proxy,
based on parental diagnoses, showed strong genetic correlation with AD
( r g =0.81). Meta-analysis
identified 29 risk loci, implicating 215 potential causative genes. Associated
genes are strongly expressed in immune-related tissues and cell types (spleen,
liver and microglia). Gene-set analyses indicate biological mechanisms involved
in lipid-related processes and degradation of amyloid precursor proteins. We
show strong genetic correlations with multiple health-related outcomes, and
Mendelian randomisation results suggest a protective effect of cognitive ability
on AD risk. These results are a step forward in identifying the genetic factors
that contribute to AD risk and add novel insights into the neurobiology of
AD.

## Results
Phase 1 involved a genome-wide meta-analysis for clinically-diagnosed AD
case-control status using cohorts collected by 3 independent consortia
(Alzheimer’s disease working group of the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium
(PGC-ALZ), the International Genomics of Alzheimer’s Project (IGAP), and
the Alzheimer’s Disease Sequencing Project (ADSP)), totalling 79,145
individuals ( N sum; effective sample
size N eff =72,500) of European
ancestry and 9,862,738 genetic variants passing quality control ( Figure 1 , Supplementary Table 1 ). The ADSP
subset encompassed whole exome sequencing data from 4,343 cases and 3,163
controls, while the remaining datasets consisted of genotype single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) arrays. For PGC-ALZ and ADSP, raw genotypic data were
subjected to a standardized quality control pipeline. GWA analyses were run per
cohort and then included in a meta-analysis alongside IGAP, for which only
summary statistics were available (see Methods ). As described in detail in the Supplementary Note , the phase 1
analysis identified 18 independent loci meeting genome-wide significance (GWS;
P<5×10 −8 ), all of which have been identified
by previous GWASs ( Table 1 , Supplementary Figure 1 , Supplementary Table
2 ).

We next (phase 2) performed a GWAS using 376,113 individuals of European
ancestry from UKB with parental AD status weighted by age to construct an
AD-by-proxy status ( Figure 1 ). Here, we
identified 13 independent GWS loci, 8 of which overlapped with phase 1 ( Table 1 , Supplementary Note ). We observed a
strong genetic correlation of 0.81 (s.e.m=0.185) between AD status and
AD-by-proxy, as well as substantial concordance in the individual SNP effects,
as described in the Supplementary Note .

Given the high genetic overlap, in phase 3 we conducted a meta-analysis
of the clinical AD GWAS and the AD-by-proxy GWAS ( Figure 1 ), comprising a total sample size of 455,258
( N eff =450,734), including
71,880 (proxy) cases and 383,378 (proxy) controls. The linkage disequilibrium
(LD) score intercept 14 was
1.0018 (s.e.m=0.0109) and the sample size-adjusted 15 λ 1000 was 1.044,
indicating that most of the inflation in genetic signal
(λ GC =1.0833) could be explained by polygenicity ( Supplementary Figure 1B ).
There were 2,357 GWS variants, which were represented by 94 lead SNPs, located
in 29 distinct loci ( Table 1 , Figure 2 , Supplementary Figure 2 ). These
included 15 of the 18 loci detected in Phase 1, all of the 13 detected in Phase
2, as well as 9 loci that were sub-threshold in both individual analyses but
reached significance in the meta-analysis. A large proportion of the lead SNPs
(60 of 94) was concentrated in the established APOE risk locus
on chromosome 19. This region is known to have a complex LD structure and a very
strong effect on AD risk; thus, we consider these SNPs likely to represent a
single association signal. Conditional analysis indicated that most loci
represented a single fully independent signal, while the TREM2 , PTK2B/CLU , and APOE loci contained
multiple possible causal signals ( Supplementary Note ; Supplementary Tables 3 – 4 ).

Of the 29 associated loci, 16 overlapped 1 of the 20 genomic regions
previously identified by the GWAS of Lambert et al. 4 , replicating their findings, while 13
were novel. The association signals of five loci ( CR1, ZCWPW1,
CLU/PTK2B, MS4A6a and APH1B ) are partly based on
the ADSP exome-sequencing data. Re-analysis of these loci excluding ADSP
resulted in similar association signals ( Supplementary Table 5 ), implying
that we have correctly adjusted for partial sample overlap between IGAP and
ADSP. The lead SNPs in three loci (with nearest genes HESX1 , TREM2 and CNTNAP2 ) were only available in
the UKB cohort ( Table 1 ), but were of
good quality (INFO>0.91, HWE P >0.19,
missingness<0.003). These SNPs were all rare (minor allele frequency
(MAF) <0.003), meaning that they will require future confirmation in
another similarly large sample. However, variants in TREM2 have
been robustly linked to AD in prior research. 9

Verifying the 13 novel loci against other recent genetic studies on
AD 9 , 16 , 12 , 17 , 18 , 4 loci ( TREM2 , ECHDC3 , SCIMP and ABI3 )
have been previously discovered in addition to the 16 identified by Lambert et
al., leaving 9 novel loci at the time of this writing ( ADAMTS4, HESX1,
CLNK, CNTNAP2, ADAM10, APH1B, KAT8, ALPK2, AC074212.3 ). The ADAMTS4 and KAT8 loci have also since been
identified in a recent analysis in a partially overlapping sample. 13 Comparing our meta-analysis
results with all loci of Lambert et al. 4 to determine differences in associated loci, we were
unable to observe 4 loci ( MEF2C, NME8, CELF1 and FERMT2 ) at a GWS level (observed P -values
were 1.6×10 −5 to 0.0011), which was mostly caused by a
lower association signal in the UKB dataset ( Supplementary Table 6 ). By
contrast, Lambert et al. 4 were
unable to replicate the DSG2 and CD33 loci in
the second stage of their study. In our study, DSG2 was also
not supported (meta-analysis P =0.030; UKB analysis P =0.766), implying invalidation of this locus, while the CD33 locus (rs3865444 in Table 1 ) was significantly associated with AD (meta-analysis P =6.34×10 −9 ; UKB analysis
P=4.97×10 −5 ), implying a genuine genetic
association with AD risk.

Next, we aimed to find further support for the novel findings by using
an independent Icelandic cohort (deCODE 19 , 20 ), including
6,593 AD cases and 174,289 controls ( Figure
1 ; Supplementary
Table 7 ) to test replication of the lead SNP or an LD-proxy of the
lead SNP ( r 2 >0.9) in each
locus. We were unable to test two loci as the lead SNPs (and SNPs in high LD)
either were not present in the Icelandic reference panel or were not imputed
with sufficient quality. For 6 of the 7 novel loci tested for replication, we
observed the same direction of effect in the deCODE cohort. Furthermore, 4 loci
( CLNK , ADAM10 , APH1B , AC074212.3 ) showed nominally significant association
results ( P <0.05) for the same SNP or a SNP in high LD
( r 2 >0.9) within the same
locus (two-tailed binomial test P =1.9×10 −4 ). The locus on
chromosome 1 ( ADAMTS4 ) was very close to significance
( P =0.053), implying stronger evidence for replication than
for non-replication. Apart from the novel loci, we also observed sign
concordance for 96.3% of the top (per-locus) lead SNPs in all loci from the
meta-analysis (two-tailed binomial test P =4.17×10 −7 ) that were available
in deCODE (26 of 27).

As an additional method of testing for replication, we used genome-wide
polygenic score prediction in two independent samples. 21 The current results explain 7.1% of the
variance in clinical AD at a low best fitting P- threshold of
1.69×10 −5 in 761 individuals with case-control
diagnoses ( P =1.80×10 −10 ). When
excluding the APOE locus (chr19: 45020859–45844508), the
results explain 3.9% of the variance with a best fitting P -threshold of 3.5×10 −5 ( P =1.90×10 −6 ). We also predict AD
status in a sample of 1,459 pathologically confirmed cases and
controls 22 with an R 2 =0.41 and an area under the
curve (AUC) of 0.827 (95% confidence interval (95% CI): 0.805–0.849, P =9.71×10 −70 ) using the
best-fitting model of SNPs with a GWAS P <0.50, as well
as R 2 =0.23 and AUC=0.733 (95% CI:
0.706–0.758, P =1.16×10 −45 )
using only APOE SNPs. This validation sample contains a small
number of individuals overlapping with IGAP; previous simulations with this
sample have indicated that this overfitting increases the margin of error of the
estimate approximately 2–3%. 22 This sample, however, represented severe, late-stage AD
cases contrasted with supernormal controls, so the polygenic prediction may be
higher than expected for typical case-control or population samples.

Functional annotation of all GWS SNPs ( n= 2,357) in the
associated loci showed that SNPs were mostly located in intronic/intergenic
areas, but also in regions that were enriched for chromatin states 4 and 5,
implying effects on active transcription ( Figure
3 ; Supplementary
Table 8 ). Twenty-five GWS SNPs were exonic non-synonymous ( Figure 3A ; Supplementary Table 9 ) with likely
deleterious impacts on gene function. Converging evidence of strong association
( Z >|7|) and a high observed probability of a
deleterious variant effect (CADD 23 score≥30) was found for rs75932628
( TREM2 ), rs142412517 ( TOMM40 ) and rs7412
( APOE ). The first two missense mutations are rare
(MAF=0.002 and 0.001, respectively) and the alternative alleles were associated
with higher risk for AD. The latter APOE missense mutation is
the well-established protective allele Apoε2. Supplementary Tables 8 and 9 present a detailed
annotation catalogue of variants in the associated genomic loci. We also applied
a fine-mapping model 24 to
identify credible sets of causal SNPs from the identified GWS variants ( Supplementary Table 8 ).
The proportion of plausible causal SNPs varied drastically between loci; for
example, 30 out of 854 SNPs were selected in the APOE locus
(no. 26), while 345 out of 434 SNPs were nominated in the HLA-DRB1 locus (no. 7). Credible causal SNPs were not
limited to known functional categories such as ExNS, indicating more complicated
causal pathways that merit investigation with the set of variants prioritized by
these statistical and functional annotations.

Partitioned heritability analysis, 25 excluding SNPs with extremely large effect sizes (that
is, APOE variants) showed enrichment for the SNP-heritability
( h 2 SNP )
for variants located in H3K27ac marks (enrichment=3.18, P =9.63×10 −5 ), which are associated
with activation of transcription, and in super enhancers (enrichment=3.62, P =2.28×10 −4 ), which are genomic
regions where multiple epigenetic marks of active transcription are clustered
( Figure 3D ; Supplementary Table 10 ).
Heritability was also enriched in variants on chromosome 17 (enrichment=3.61, P =1.63×10 −4 ) and we observed a
trend of enrichment for heritability in common rather than rarer variants ( Supplementary Figure 3 ; Supplementary Tables
11 and 12 ).
Although a large proportion (23.9%) of the heritability can be explained by SNPs
on chromosome 19, this enrichment is not significant, due to the large standard
errors around this estimate ( Supplementary Table 11 ). Overall these results suggest that, despite
some nonsynonymous variants contributing to AD risk, most of the GWS SNPs are
located in non-coding regions and are enriched for regions that have an
activating effect on transcription.

To link the associated variants to genes, we applied three gene-mapping
strategies implemented in Functional Mapping and Annotation (FUMA) 26 (see Methods ). We used all SNPs with a
P-value<5×10 −8 for gene-mapping. Positional gene-mapping aligned SNPs to 99 genes by their
location within or immediately up/downstream (±10 kilobases (kb)) of
known gene boundaries, eQTL (expression quantitative trait
loci) gene-mapping matched cis-eQTL SNPs to 168 genes whose
expression levels they influence in one or more tissues, and c hromatin
interaction mapping linked SNPs to 21 genes based on
three-dimensional DNA-DNA interactions between each SNP’s genomic region
and nearby or distant genes, which we limited to include only interactions
between annotated enhancer and promoter regions ( Supplementary Figure 4 ; Supplementary Tables 13 and 14 ). This resulted
in 192 uniquely mapped genes, 80 of which were implicated by at least two
mapping strategies and 16 by all 3 ( Figure
4E ).

Of special interest is the locus on chromosome 8
( CLU/PTK2B ). In the GWAS by Lambert et al. 4 , this locus was defined as 2
distinct loci ( CLU and PTK2B ). Although our
conditional analysis based on genetic data also specified this locus as having
at least 2 independent association signals ( Supplementary Table 4 ), the
chromatin interaction data in two immune-related tissues – the spleen and
liver ( Supplementary Table
14 ) – suggests that the genomic regions indexed by PTK2B and CLU loci might physically
interact ( Figure 3E ), therefore putatively
affecting AD pathogenesis via the same biological mechanism. The patterns of
tissue-specific gene expression are largely dissimilar between CLU and PTK2B , although both are expressed
relatively highly in the brain and lymph nodes. 27 Future studies should thus consider the
joint effects of how these two genes simultaneously impact AD risk.

Eight genes ( HLA-DRB5, HLA-DRB1, HLA-DQA, HLA-DQB1, KAT8,
PRSS36, ZNF232 and CEACAM19 ) are particularly
notable as they are implicated via eQTL association in the hippocampus, a brain
region highly affected early in AD pathogenesis ( Supplementary Table 13 ). Chromosome
16 contains a locus implicated by long-range eQTL association ( Figure 3F ), clearly illustrating how the more distant
genes C16orf93, RNF40 and ITGAX can be
affected by a genetic factor (rs59735493) in various body tissues (for example,
blood and skin), including a change in expression for RNF40 observed in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. These observations emphasize the
relevance of considering putative causal genes or regulatory elements not solely
on the physical location but also on epigenetic influences. As detailed in the Supplementary Note ,
eQTLs were overrepresented in the risk loci and a number of quantitative trait
locus (QTL) associations (including eQTLs, methylation quantitative trait loci
(mQTLs), and histone acetylation quantitative trait loci (haQTLs)) were
identified in relevant brain regions, providing interesting targets for future
functional follow-up and biological interpretation ( Supplementary Tables
15 – 17 ).

Although these gene-mapping strategies imply multiple putative causal
genes per GWAS locus, several genes are of particular interest, as they have
functional or previous genetic association with AD. For locus 1 in Supplementary Table 13 , ADAMTS4 encodes a protein of the ADAMTS family which has a
function in neuroplasticity and has been extensively studied for its role in AD
pathogenesis. 28 For
locus 19, the obvious most likely causal gene is ADAM10 , as
this gene has been associated with AD by research focusing on rare coding
variants in ADAM10 . 29 However, this is the first time that this gene is
implicated as a common risk factor for AD, and is supported by the putative
causal molecular mechanism observed in dorsolateral prefrontal cortex eQTL and
mQTL data ( Supplementary
Tables 15 and 16 ) for multiple common SNPs in LD. The lead SNP for locus 20 is a
nonsynonymous variant in exon 1 of APH1B , which encodes for a
protein subunit of the γ -secretase complex cleaving
APP. 30 A highly
promising candidate gene for locus 21 is KAT8 , as the lead SNP
of this locus is located within the third intron of KAT8 , and
multiple significant variants within this locus influence the expression or
methylation levels of KAT8 in multiple brain regions ( Supplementary Tables 13 and 16 ) including
hippocampus. The chromatin modifier KAT8 is regulated by KANSL1 , a gene associated with AD in absence of
Apoɛ4. A study on Parkinson’s disease reported KAT8 as potential causal gene based on GWAS and
differential gene expression results, implying a putative shared role in
neurodegeneration of KAT8 in AD and Parkinson’s
disease. 31 Although
previously reported functional information on genes can be of great value, it is
preferable to consider all implicated genes as putative causal factors to guide
potential functional follow-up experiments.

We next performed genome-wide gene-based association analysis (GWGAS)
using Multi-marker Analysis of GenoMic Annotation (MAGMA). 32 This method annotates SNPs to known
protein-coding genes to estimate aggregate associations based on all SNPs in a
gene. It differs from FUMA as it provides a statistical gene-based test, whereas
FUMA maps individually significant SNPs to genes. With GWGAS, we identified 97
genes that were significantly associated with AD ( Supplementary Figure 5 ; Supplementary Table 18 ),
of which 74 were also mapped by FUMA ( Figure
4E ). In total, 16 genes were implicated by all four strategies ( Supplementary Table 19 ),
of which 7 genes ( HLA-DRA, HLA-DRB1, PTK2B, CLU, MS4A3, SCIMP and RABEP1 ) are not located in the APOE -locus,
and therefore of high interest for further investigation.

Using the gene-based P-values, we performed gene-set analysis for
curated biological pathways and tissue/single-cell expression. Four Gene
Ontology (GO) 33 gene-sets were
significantly associated with AD risk: Protein lipid complex ( P =3.93×10 −10 ), Regulation
of amyloid precursor protein catabolic process ( P =8.16×10 −9 ), High
density lipoprotein particle ( P =7.81×10 −8 ), and Protein
lipid complex assembly ( P =7.96×10 −7 ) ( Figure 4A ; Supplementary Tables 20 and 21 ). Conditional analysis
on the APOE locus showed associations with AD for these four
gene-sets to be independent of the effect of APOE , though part
of the association signal was also attributable to APOE . All 25
genes of the High density lipoprotein particle pathway are also
part of the Protein lipid complex ; conditional analysis showed
that these gene-sets are not interpretable as independent associations
( P =0.18), but the other three sets are independently
significant ( Supplementary
Table 20 ).

Linking gene-based P -values to tissue- and
cell-type-specific gene-sets, no association survived the stringent Bonferroni
correction, which corrected for all tested gene-sets (that is, 6,994 GO
categories, 53 tissues and 39 cell types). However, we did observe suggestive
associations across immune-related tissues when correcting only for the number
of tests within all tissue types or cell-types ( Figure 4C ; Supplementary Table 22 ), particularly whole blood
( P =5.61×10 −6 ), spleen
( P =1.50×10 −5 ) and lung
( P =4.67×10 −4 ), which were
independent from the APOE locus. In brain single-cell
expression gene-set analyses, we found association for microglia in the
mouse-based expression dataset
( P =1.96×10 −3 ), though not
surviving the stringent Bonferroni correction ( Figure 4B ; Supplementary Table 23 ). However, we observed a similar association
signal for microglia in a second independent single-cell expression dataset in
humans ( P =2.56×10 −3 ) ( Supplementary Figure 6 ; Supplementary Table 24 ).
As anticipated, both microglia signals are partly depending on APOE , though a large part is independent ( Supplementary Tables 23 and 24 ).

As described in the Supplementary Note and Supplementary Tables
25 – 26 , we observed that the genetic influences on AD overlapped with a
number of other diseases and psychological traits including cognitive ability
and educational attainment, replicating previous studies. 34 , 35 To extend these findings, we used Generalised
Summary-statistic-based Mendelian Randomisation 36 (GSMR) to test for potential credible
causal associations of genetically correlated outcomes which may directly
influence the risk for AD. Due to the nature of AD being a late-onset disorder
and summary statistics for most other traits being obtained from younger
samples, we do not report tests for the opposite direction of potential
causality (that is, we did not test for a causal effect of a late-onset disease
on an early-onset disease). In this set of analyses, SNPs from the summary
statistics of genetically correlated phenotypes were used as instrumental
variables to estimate the putative causal effect of these
“exposure” phenotypes on AD risk by comparing the ratio of
SNPs’ associations with each exposure to their associations with AD
outcome (see Methods ). Association
statistics were standardized, such that the reported effects reflect the
expected difference in odds ratio (OR) for AD as a function of every SD increase
in the exposure phenotype. We observed a protective effect of cognitive ability
(OR=0.89, 95% CI: 0.85–0.92, P =5.07×10 −9 ), educational
attainment (OR=0.88, 95%CI: 0.81–0.94, P= 3.94×10 −4 ), and height (OR=0.96,
95%CI: 0.94–0.97, P =1.84×10 −8 )
on risk for AD ( Supplementary
Table 27 ; Supplementary Figure 7 ). No substantial evidence of pleiotropy was
observed between AD and these phenotypes, with <1% of overlapping SNPs
being filtered as outliers ( Supplementary Table 27 ).

## Discussion
By using an unconventional approach of including a proxy phenotype for AD to
increase sample size, we have identified nine novel loci and gained novel biological
knowledge on AD etiology. We were able to test seven of the nine novel loci for
replication, of which four loci showed clear replication, one locus showed marginal
replication and two loci were not replicated at this moment. Both the high genetic
correlation between the standard case-control status and the UKB by proxy phenotype
( r g =0.81) and the high rate of
novel loci replication in the independent deCODE cohort suggest that this strategy
is robust. Through in silico functional follow-up analysis, and in line with
previous research, 18 , 37 we emphasise the crucial causal role of the
immune system - rather than immune response as a consequence of disease pathology -
by establishing variant enrichments for immune-related body tissues (whole blood,
spleen, liver) and for the main immune cells of the brain (microglia). Of note, the
enrichment observed for liver could alternatively indicate the genetic involvement
of the lipid system in AD pathogenesis. 38 Furthermore, we observe informative eQTL associations and
chromatin interactions within immune-related tissues for the identified genomic risk
loci. Together with the AD-associated genetic effects on lipid metabolism in our
study, these biological implications (which are based on genetic signals and
unbiased by prior biological beliefs) strengthen the hypothesis that AD pathogenesis
involves an interplay between inflammation and lipids, as lipid changes might harm
immune responses of microglia and astrocytes, and vascular health of the
brain. 39

In accordance with previous clinical research, our study suggests an
important role for protective effects of several human traits on AD. Cognitive
reserve has been proposed as a protective mechanism in which the brain aims to
control brain damage with prior existing cognitive processing strategies. 40 Our findings imply that some
component of the genetic factors for AD might affect cognitive reserve, rather than
being involved in AD-pathology-related damaging processes, influencing AD
pathogenesis in an indirect way through cognitive reserve. Furthermore, a
large-scale community-based study observed that AD incidence rates declined over
decades, which was specific for individuals with at minimum a high school
diploma. 41 Combined with
our Mendelian randomisation results for educational attainment, this suggests that
the protective effect of educational attainment on AD is influenced by genetics.
Similarly, the observed positive effects of height could be a result of the genetic
overlap between height and intracranial volume 42 , 43 , a measure
associated to decreased risk of AD. 44 This indirect association is furthermore supported by the
observed increase in cognitive reserve for taller individuals. 45 Alternatively, genetic variants influencing
height might also affect biological mechanisms involved in AD aetiology, such as IGF1 that codes for the insulin-like growth factor and is
associated with cerebral amyloid. 46

The results of this study could furthermore serve as a valuable resource for
selection of promising genes for functional follow-up experiments and identify
targets for drug development and stratification approaches. We anticipate that
functional interpretation strategies and follow-up experiments will result in a
comprehensive understanding of late-onset AD aetiology, which will serve as a solid
foundation for improvement of AD therapy.

## URLs
UK Biobank: http://ukbiobank.ac.uk

Database of Genotypes and Phenotypes (dbGaP): https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gap

Functional Mapping and Annotation (FUMA) software: http://fuma.ctglab.nl

Multi-marker Analysis of GenoMic Annotation (MAGMA) software: http://ctg.cncr.nl/software/magma

mvGWAMA and effective sample size calculation: https://github.com/Kyoko-wtnb/mvGWAMA

LD Score Regression software: https://github.com/bulik/ldsc

LD Hub (GWAS summary statistics): http://ldsc.broadinstitute.org/

LD scores: https://data.broadinstitute.org/alkesgroup/LDSCORE/

Psychiatric Genomics Consortium (GWAS summary statistics): http://www.med.unc.edu/pgc/results-and-downloads

MSigDB curated gene-set database: http://software.broadinstitute.org/gsea/msigdb/collections.jsp

NHGRI GWAS catalog: https://www.ebi.ac.uk/gwas/

Generalised Summary-data-based Mendelian Randomisation software: http://cnsgenomics.com/software/gsmr/

Credible SNP set analysis software: https://github.com/hailianghuang/FM-summary

## Online Methods
Participants in this study were obtained from multiple sources,
including raw data from case-control samples collected by the Psychiatric
Genomics Consortium (PGC-ALZ) and the Alzheimer’s Disease Sequencing
Project (ADSP; made publicly available through dbGaP [see URLs ]), summary data from the case-control samples in
the International Genomics of Alzheimer’s Project (IGAP), and raw data
from the population-based UK Biobank (UKB) sample which was used to create a
weighted AD-proxy phenotype. An additional independent case-control sample
(deCODE) was used for replication. Full descriptions of the samples and their
respective phenotyping and genotyping procedures are provided in the Supplementary Note and
the Life Sciences Reporting Summary .

Genome-wide association analysis (GWAS) for each of the ADSP,
PGC-ALZ and UKB datasets was performed in PLINK 47 , using logistic regression for
dichotomous phenotypes (cases versus controls for ADSP and PGC-ALZ cohorts),
and linear regression for phenotypes analysed as continuous outcomes (proxy
phenotype constructed as the number of parents with AD for UKB cohort). For
the ADSP and PGC-ALZ cohorts, association tests were adjusted for gender,
batch (if applicable), and the first 4 ancestry principal components. Twenty
principal components were calculated, and depending on the dataset being
tested, additional principal components (on top of the standard of 4) were
added if significantly associated to the phenotype. Furthermore, for the
PGC-ALZ cohorts age was included as a covariate. For 4,537 controls of the
DemGene cohort (subset of PGC-ALZ), no detailed age information was
available, besides the age range the subjects were in (20–45 years).
We therefore set the age of these individuals conservatively to 20 years.
For the ADSP dataset, age was not included as a covariate due to the
enrichment for older controls (mean age cases = 73.1 years (s.e.m.=7.8);
mean age controls = 86.1 years (s.e.m.=4.5)) in their collection procedures.
Correcting for age in ADSP would remove a substantial part of genuine
association signals (e.g. well-established APOE locus
rs11556505 is strongly associated to AD
( P =1.08×10 −99 ), which is lost
when correcting for age ( P =0.0054). For the UKB dataset, 12
ancestry principal components were included as covariates, as well as age,
sex, genotyping array, and assessment centre. We used the genome-wide
threshold for significance of P<5×10 −8 ).

Two meta-analyses were performed, including: phase 1) cohorts with
case-control phenotypes (IGAP, ADSP and PGC-ALZ datasets), and phase 3) all
cohorts, also including the UKB proxy phenotype.

Because of partial overlap between cohorts, the per SNP test
statistics was defined by Z k = ∑ i w i Z i ∑ i w i 2 + ∑ i ∑ j w i w j | C T I i j | ( i ≠ j ) where w i and Z i are the squared root of
the sample size and the test statistics of SNP k in cohort i , respectively. CTI is the cross-trait LD score
intercept estimated by LDSC 14 , 48 using
genome-wide summary statistics. This is equal to 48 C T I i j N s i j ρ i j N i N j where N i and N j are the sample sizes of
cohorts i and j and N sij the number of
samples overlapping between them, and ρ ij the
phenotypic correlation between the measures used in the two cohorts for the
overlapping samples. Under the null hypothesis of no association any
correlation between Z i and Z j is determined only by
that phenotypic correlation, scaled by the relative degree of overlap. As
such, this correlation can be estimated by the CTI.

The test statistics per SNP per GWAS were converted from the
P-value, incorporating the sign of either beta or odds ratio. When direction
is aligned the conversion is two-sided. To avoid infinite values, we
replaced P-value 1 with 0.999999 and P-value < 1e-323 to 1e-323 (the
minimum >0 value in Python). The script for the multivariate GWAS is
available online (see URLs ).

The effective sample size
( N eff ) is computed
for each SNP k from the matrix M ,
containing the sample size N i of each cohort i on the diagonal and the estimated number of
shared data points N s i j ρ i j = C T I i j N i N j for each pair of cohorts i and j as the off-diagonal
values. A recursive approach is used to compute N eff . Going from
the first cohort to the last the (remaining) size of the current cohort
is added to the total N eff .
Then for each remaining other cohort it overlaps with, the size of those
other cohorts is reduced by the expected number of samples shared by the
current cohort; overlap between the remaining cohorts is similarly
adjusted. This process ensures that each overlapping data point is
counted only once in N eff .

The computation proceeds as follows. Starting with the first
cohort in M , N eff is first
increased by M 1,1 ,
corresponding to the sample size of that cohort. The proportion of
samples shared between cohort 1 and each other cohort j is then computed as p 1,j = M 1,j / M j,j ,
and M is adjusted to remove this overlap, multiplying
all values in each column j by
1- p 1,j . This
amounts to reducing the sample size of each other cohort j by the number of samples it shares with cohort 1
and reducing the shared samples between cohort j and
subsequent cohorts by the same proportion. After this, the first row and
column of M are discarded, and the same process is
applied to the new M matrix. This is repeated until M is empty.

The effective sample size is used as a parameter in the MAGMA
analysis (see Methods “Gene
based-analysis”) and reported in the main text as the combined
sample sizes for the meta-analysis. We use the term N sum to indicate
the total number of individuals when simply summing them over the
distinct cohorts. The script for the N eff computation is
available online (see URLs ).

We used FUMA 26 v1.2.8, an online platform for functional mapping and annotation of
genetic variants, to define genomic risk loci and obtain functional
information of relevant SNPs in these loci. We first identified
independent significant SNPs that have a genome-wide significant P-value
(<5×10 −8 ) and are independent from
each other at r 2 <0.6. These SNPs
were further represented by lead SNPs, which are a subset of the
independent significant SNPs that are in approximate linkage equilibrium
with each other at r 2 >0.6. We then
defined associated genomic risk loci by merging any physically
overlapping lead SNPs (LD blocks <250kb apart). LD information
was calculated using the UK Biobank genotype data as a reference.

For GWS SNPs in the defined risk loci, we applied a summary
statistic-based fine-mapping model to identify credible causal SNPs
within each locus, as previously described 24 . This Bayesian model estimates a
per-SNP posterior probability of a true disease association using
maximum likelihood estimation and the steepest descent approach,
creating a set of SNPs in each locus that contains the causal SNP in 99%
of cases, given that the causal variants are among the genotyped/imputed
SNPs. The software used, FM-summary, is available online (see URLs ).

For novel SNPs identified in the phase 3 meta-analysis, replication
was tested in the independent deCODE sample using logistic regression with
Alzheimer’s disease status as the response and genotype counts and a
set of nuisance variables including sex, county of birth, and current age as
predictors. 20 Correction for inflation of test statistics due to relatedness and
population stratification in this Icelandic cohort was performed using the
intercept estimate (1.29) from LD score regression 14 .

We performed conditional analysis with GCTA-COJO 49 to assess the independence of
association signals, either within or between GWAS risk loci. COJO enables
conditional analysis of GWAS summary statistics without individual-level
genotype data. We therefore performed conditional analysis on the phase 3
summary statistics, using 10,000 randomly selected unrelated samples from
the UKB dataset as a reference dataset to determine LD-patterns. Conditional
analysis was run per chromosome or per locus with the default settings of
the software.

LD score regression 14 was used to estimate clinical AD heritability and to
calculate genetic correlations 48 between the case-control and proxy phenotypes using
summary statistics. Pre-calculated LD scores from the 1000 Genomes European
reference population were obtained online (see URLs ). Liability heritability was calculated with a population
prevalence of 0.043 1 (the population prevalence of age group
70–75 in the Western European population, resembling the average age
of onset of 74.5 for the clinical case group) and a sample prevalence of
0.304. The genetic correlation was calculated on HapMap3 SNPs only to ensure
high quality LD score calculation.

To test whether specific categories of SNP annotations were
enriched for heritability, we partitioned the SNP heritability for
binary annotations using stratified LD score regression 14 . Heritability
enrichment was calculated as the proportion of heritability explained by
a SNP category divided by the proportion of SNPs that are in that
category. Partitioned heritability was computed by 28 functional
annotation categories, by minor allele frequency (MAF) in six percentile
bins, and by 22 chromosomes. Annotations for binary categories of
functional genomic characteristics (for example, coding or regulatory
regions) were obtained online (see URLs ). The Bonferroni-corrected significance threshold for
56 annotations was set at: P <0.05/56=8.93×10 −4 .

We calculated polygenic scores (PGS) using two independent genotype
datasets. First, 761 individuals (379 cases and 382 controls) from the
ADDNeuroMed study 50 were
included, using the same QC and imputation approach as for the other
datasets with genotype-level data (see Supplementary Note ). Second,
1459 individuals (912 severe, late-stage cases and 547 age-matched controls
with little to no cognitive dysfunction) from the TGEN study 22 were assessed and their
diagnostic status was confirmed via post-mortem neuropathology. Imputed SNPs
in this sample were filtered based on INFO score>0.9 and
MAF>0.01. PGS were created using PLINK 47 for the TGEN dataset and
PRSice 21 for the
ADDNeuroMed dataset. In both samples, PGS were calculated on hard-called
imputed genotypes using P- value thresholds from 0.0 to 0.5
and using PLINK’s clumping procedure to prune for LD. Clumping was
based on the effect size estimates of SNPs originating from the phase 3
meta-analysis for the ADDNeuroMed sample. For TGEN, clumping was previously
performed using the IGAP summary statistics; these clumped SNPs were
filtered for overlap with the phase 3 SNPs. PGS were calculated in both
samples using the SNP effect size estimates from the phase 3 meta-analysis.
The explained variance (Δ R 2 ) was derived
from a linear model in which the AD phenotype was regressed on each PGS
while controlling for GWAS covariates, compared to a linear model with
covariates only. In the TGEN dataset, sensitivity, specificity, and area
under the curve (AUC) of predicting confirmed case/control status were
calculated, using the R package pROC 51 and bootstrapped confidence intervals. Of note,
approximately 3% of the TGEN sample overlapped with the IGAP cohort included
in the meta-analysis; previous simulation work using PGS in this sample has
shown that this overfitting leads to only a modest increase (2–3%) in
the margin of error around the AUC estimate. 22

Functional annotation of GWS SNPs implicated in the meta-analysis
was performed using FUMA 26 v1.2.8. Functional consequences for these SNPs were obtained by matching
SNPs to databases containing known functional annotations, including
ANNOVAR 52 categories, Combined Annotation Dependent Depletion (CADD) scores 23 , RegulomeDB 53 (RDB) scores, and
chromatin states 54 , 55 . ANNOVAR annotates the
functional consequence of SNPs on genes (for example, intron, exon,
intergenic). CADD scores predict how deleterious the effect of a SNP with
higher scores referring to higher deleteriousness. A CADD score above 12.37
is the threshold to be potentially pathogenic 56 . The RegulomeDB score is a
categorical score based on information from expression quantitative trait
loci (eQTLs) and chromatin marks, ranging from 1a to 7 with lower scores
indicating an increased likelihood of having a regulatory function. The
chromatin state represents the accessibility of genomic regions (every
200bp) with 15 categorical states predicted by a hidden Markov model based
on 5 chromatin marks in the Roadmap Epigenomics Project. 55 A lower state indicates higher
accessibility, with states 1–7 referring to open chromatin states. We
annotated the minimum chromatin state across tissues to SNPs. A legend
describing the RegulomeDB and chromatin state scores can be found in the Supplementary
Note .

Genome-wide significant loci obtained by GWAS were mapped to genes
in FUMA 26 using three
strategies: Positional mapping maps SNPs to genes based on physical
distance (within a 10kb window) from known protein coding genes
in the human reference assembly (GRCh37/hg19). eQTL mapping maps SNPs to genes with which they show a
significant eQTL association (i.e. allelic variation at the SNP
is associated with the expression level of that gene). eQTL
mapping uses information from 45 tissue types in 3 data
repositories (GTEx 57 v6, Blood eQTL browser 58 , BIOS QTL
browser 59 ), and is based on cis-eQTLs which can map
SNPs to genes up to 1Mb apart. We used a false discovery rate
(FDR) of 0.05 to define significant eQTL associations. Chromatin interaction mapping was performed to map SNPs
to genes when there is a three-dimensional DNA-DNA interaction
between the SNP region and another gene region. Chromatin
interaction mapping can involve long-range interactions as it
does not have a distance boundary. FUMA currently contains Hi-C
data of 14 tissue types from the study of Schmitt et
al 60 .
Since chromatin interactions are often defined in a certain
resolution, such as 40kb, an interacting region can span
multiple genes. If a SNP is located in a region that interacts
with a region containing multiple genes, it will be mapped to
each of those genes. To further prioritize candidate genes, we
selected only genes mapped by chromatin interaction in which one
region involved in the interaction overlaps with a predicted
enhancer region in any of the 111 tissue/cell types from the
Roadmap Epigenomics Project 55 and the other region is located in a
gene promoter region (250bp up- and 500bp downstream of the
transcription start site and also predicted by Roadmap to be a
promoter region). This method reduces the number of genes mapped
but increases the likelihood that those identified will have a
plausible biological function. We used an false discovery rate
of 1×10 −5 to define significant
interactions, based on previous recommendations 60 modified to
account for the differences in cell lines used here.

Positional mapping maps SNPs to genes based on physical
distance (within a 10kb window) from known protein coding genes
in the human reference assembly (GRCh37/hg19).

eQTL mapping maps SNPs to genes with which they show a
significant eQTL association (i.e. allelic variation at the SNP
is associated with the expression level of that gene). eQTL
mapping uses information from 45 tissue types in 3 data
repositories (GTEx 57 v6, Blood eQTL browser 58 , BIOS QTL
browser 59 ), and is based on cis-eQTLs which can map
SNPs to genes up to 1Mb apart. We used a false discovery rate
(FDR) of 0.05 to define significant eQTL associations.

Chromatin interaction mapping was performed to map SNPs
to genes when there is a three-dimensional DNA-DNA interaction
between the SNP region and another gene region. Chromatin
interaction mapping can involve long-range interactions as it
does not have a distance boundary. FUMA currently contains Hi-C
data of 14 tissue types from the study of Schmitt et
al 60 .
Since chromatin interactions are often defined in a certain
resolution, such as 40kb, an interacting region can span
multiple genes. If a SNP is located in a region that interacts
with a region containing multiple genes, it will be mapped to
each of those genes. To further prioritize candidate genes, we
selected only genes mapped by chromatin interaction in which one
region involved in the interaction overlaps with a predicted
enhancer region in any of the 111 tissue/cell types from the
Roadmap Epigenomics Project 55 and the other region is located in a
gene promoter region (250bp up- and 500bp downstream of the
transcription start site and also predicted by Roadmap to be a
promoter region). This method reduces the number of genes mapped
but increases the likelihood that those identified will have a
plausible biological function. We used an false discovery rate
of 1×10 −5 to define significant
interactions, based on previous recommendations 60 modified to
account for the differences in cell lines used here.

As AD is characterized by neurodegeneration, we annotated the
significant genomic loci with publicly available databases of
expression, methylation, and histone acetylation QTLs, as catalogued in
BRAINEAC 61 ,
CommonMind Consortium Portal 62 and xQTL Serve 63 , as an extension of the GTEx
tissue eQTL mapping performed in FUMA. Descriptions of these brain eQTL
databases and settings we used are in the Supplementary Note .

To account for the distinct types of genetic data in this study,
genotype array (PGC-ALZ, IGAP, UKB) and whole-exome sequencing data (ADSP),
we first performed two gene-based genome-wide association analysis (GWGASs)
using MAGMA 32 , followed by
a meta-analysis. SNP-based P-values from the meta-analysis of the 3
genotype-array-based datasets were used as input for the first GWGAS, while
the unimputed individual-level sequence data of ADSP was used as input for
the second GWGAS. A total of 18,233 protein-coding genes (each containing at
least one SNP in the GWAS) from the National Center for Biotechnology
Information (NCBI) 37.3 gene definitions were used as basis for GWGAS in
MAGMA. Bonferroni correction was applied to correct for multiple testing
(P<2.74×10 −6 ).

Results from the GWGAS analyses were used to test for association in
7,086 predefined gene-sets of four categories: 1. 6,994 curated gene-sets representing known biological
and metabolic pathways derived from Gene Ontology (5917
gene-sets), Biocarta (217 gene-sets), KEGG (186 gene-sets),
Reactome (674 gene-sets) catalogued by and obtained from the
MsigDB version 6.1 64 (see URLs ) Gene expression values from 53 tissues obtained from
GTEx 57 , log 2 transformed with pseudocount 1
after winsorization at 50 and averaged per tissue. Cell-type specific expression in 24 broad categories of
brain cell types, which were calculated following the method
described in ref. 37 . Briefly, brain cell-type expression data
was drawn from single-cell RNA sequencing data from mouse
brains. For each gene, the value for each cell-type was
calculated by dividing the mean Unique Molecular Identifier
(UMI) counts for the given cell type by the summed mean UMI
counts across all cell types. Single-cell gene-sets were derived
by grouping genes into 40 equal bins based on specificity of
expression. Nucleus specific gene expression of 15 distinct human
brain cell-types from the study described in 65 . The value for each
cell-type was calculated as in point 3.

1. 6,994 curated gene-sets representing known biological
and metabolic pathways derived from Gene Ontology (5917
gene-sets), Biocarta (217 gene-sets), KEGG (186 gene-sets),
Reactome (674 gene-sets) catalogued by and obtained from the
MsigDB version 6.1 64 (see URLs )

Gene expression values from 53 tissues obtained from
GTEx 57 , log 2 transformed with pseudocount 1
after winsorization at 50 and averaged per tissue.

Cell-type specific expression in 24 broad categories of
brain cell types, which were calculated following the method
described in ref. 37 . Briefly, brain cell-type expression data
was drawn from single-cell RNA sequencing data from mouse
brains. For each gene, the value for each cell-type was
calculated by dividing the mean Unique Molecular Identifier
(UMI) counts for the given cell type by the summed mean UMI
counts across all cell types. Single-cell gene-sets were derived
by grouping genes into 40 equal bins based on specificity of
expression.

Nucleus specific gene expression of 15 distinct human
brain cell-types from the study described in 65 . The value for each
cell-type was calculated as in point 3.

These gene-sets were tested using MAGMA. We computed competitive P -values, which represent the test of association for a
specific gene-set compared with genes not in the gene-set to correct for
baseline level of genetic association in the data. The Bonferroni-corrected
significance threshold was 0.05/7,087
gene-sets=7.06×10 −6 . The suggestive
significance threshold was defined by the number of tests within the
category. Conditional analyses were performed as a follow-up using MAGMA to
test whether each significant association observed was independent of APOE (a gene-set including all genes within region
chr19:45,020,859–45,844,508). Furthermore, the association between
each of the significant gene-sets was tested conditional on each of the
other significantly associated gene-sets. Gene-sets that retained their
association after correcting for other sets were considered to represent
independent signals. We note that this is not a test of association per se,
but rather a strategy to identify, among gene-sets with known significant
associations and overlap in genes, which set(s) are responsible for driving
the observed association.

Genetic correlations
( r g ) between AD and 41
phenotypes were computed using LD score regression 14 , based on GWAS summary statistics
obtained from publicly available databases (see URLs and Supplementary Table 26 ). The
Bonferroni-corrected significance threshold was 0.05/41
traits=1.22×10 −3 .

To infer credible causal associations between AD and traits that are
genetically correlated with AD, we performed Generalised Summary-data based
Mendelian Randomisation 36 (GSMR; see URLs ). This method utilizes
summary-level data to test for putative causal associations between a risk
factor (exposure) and an outcome by using independent genome-wide
significant SNPs as instrumental variables as an index of the exposure.
HEIDI-outlier detection was used to filter genetic instruments that showed
clear pleiotropic effects on the exposure phenotype and the outcome
phenotype. We used a threshold p-value of 0.01 for the outlier detection
analysis in HEIDI, which removes 1% of SNPs by chance if there is no
pleiotropic effect. To test for a potential causal effect of various
outcomes on risk for AD, we selected phenotypes in non-overlapping samples
that showed (suggestive) significant ( P <0.05)
genetic correlations ( r g ) with
AD. With this method it is typical to test for bi-directional causation by
repeating the analyses while switching the role of the exposure and the
outcome; however, because AD is a late-onset disease, it makes little sense
to estimate its causal effect on outcomes that develop earlier in life,
particularly when the summary statistics for these outcomes were derived
mostly from younger samples than those of AD cases. Therefore, we conducted
these analyses only in one direction. For genetically correlated phenotypes,
we selected independent
( r 2 =<0.1), GWS lead SNPs
as instrumental variables in the analyses. The method estimates a putative
causal effect of the exposure on the outcome
( b xy ) as a function of
the relationship between the SNPs’ effects on the exposure
( b zx ) and the SNPs’
effects on the outcome ( b zy ),
given the assumption that the effect of non-pleiotropic SNPs on an exposure
(x) should be related to their effect on the outcome (y) in an independent
sample only via mediation through the phenotypic causal pathway
( b xy ). The estimated causal
effect coefficients ( b xy ) are
approximately equal to the natural log odds ratio (OR) 36 for a case-control trait. An OR of 2
can be interpreted as a doubled risk compared to the population prevalence
of a binary trait for every SD increase in the exposure trait. This method
can help differentiate the causal direction of association between two
traits, but cannot make any statement about the intermediate mechanisms
involved in any potential causal process.

Summary statistics will be made available for download upon publication
( https://ctg.cncr.nl ).

The analyses were produced with standard code for software programs
utilized, which can be made available on request from the first author. All
software used is freely available online. Custom code for the meta-analysis
correcting for overlapping samples is available at https://github.com/Kyoko-wtnb/mvGWAMA