# Title
Genomic atlas of the human plasma proteome

# Abstract
Although plasma proteins have important roles in biological processes and
are the direct targets of many drugs, the genetic factors that control
inter-individual variation in plasma protein levels are not well understood.
Here we characterize the genetic architecture of the human plasma proteome in
healthy blood donors from the INTERVAL study. We identify 1,927 genetic
associations with 1,478 proteins, a fourfold increase on existing knowledge,
including trans associations for 1,104 proteins. To understand
the consequences of perturbations in plasma protein levels, we apply an
integrated approach that links genetic variation with biological pathway,
disease, and drug databases. We show that protein quantitative trait loci
overlap with gene expression quantitative trait loci, as well as with
disease-associated loci, and find evidence that protein biomarkers have causal
roles in disease using Mendelian randomization analysis. By linking genetic
factors to diseases via specific proteins, our analyses highlight potential
therapeutic targets, opportunities for matching existing drugs with new disease
indications, and potential safety concerns for drugs under development.

## Genetic architecture of the plasma proteome
We performed genome-wide testing of 10.6 million imputed autosomal variants
against levels of 2,994 plasma proteins in 3,301 individuals of European descent
( Methods , Extended Data Fig. 1 ). We demonstrated the robustness of protein
measurements in several ways ( Supplementary Note , Extended Data Fig.
2 ), including: highly consistent measurements in replicate samples;
temporal consistency of protein levels within individuals over two years ( Extended Data Fig. 3b ); and replication of known
associations with non-genetic factors ( Supplementary Tables 1, 2 ). To assess potential off-target
cross-reactivity, we tested 920 aptamers (SOMAmers) for detection of proteins with
at least 40% sequence homology to the target protein ( Methods ). Although 126 (14%) SOMAmers showed comparable binding with a
homologous protein ( Supplementary
Table 3 ), nearly half of these were binding to alternative forms of the
same protein.

We found 1,927 significant ( P < 1.5 ×
10 −11 ) associations between 1,478 proteins and 764 genomic
regions ( Fig. 1a , Supplementary Table 4 , Supplementary Fig. 1 , Supplementary Note Table 1 ),
with 89% of these pQTLs being previously unreported. Of the 764 associated regions,
502 (66%) had local-acting ( cis ) associations only, 228 (30%) trans only, and 34 (4%) both cis and trans ( Supplementary Note Table 1 ). Of the cis pQTL sentinel
variants, 95% and 87% were located within 200 kb and 100 kb, respectively, of the
relevant gene’s canonical transcription start site (TSS), and 44% were within
the gene itself. The P values for cis associations
increased with distance from the TSS ( Fig. 1b ),
mirroring findings for gene expression QTLs (eQTLs) 12 . Of proteins with a significant pQTL, 88% had
either cis ( n = 374) or trans ( n = 925) associations only, and 12% ( n = 179)
had both ( Supplementary Note Table
1 ). The majority of significantly associated proteins (75%; n = 1,113) had a single pQTL, while 20% had two and 5% had more
than two ( Fig. 1c ). To detect multiple
independent associations at the same locus, we used stepwise conditional analysis,
identifying 2,658 conditionally significant associations ( Supplementary Table 5 ). Of
the 1,927 pQTLs, 414 (21%) had multiple conditionally significant associations
( Fig. 1d ), of which 255 were cis .

We tested replication of 163 pQTLs in 4,998 individuals using an alternative
protein assay (Olink, see Methods ) 13 . Effect-size estimates were
strongly correlated between the SOMAscan and Olink platforms ( r =
0.83; Extended Data Fig. 3c ). One-hundred and
six out of one-hundred and sixty-three (65% overall; 81% cis , 52% trans ) pQTLs were replicated after Bonferroni correction ( Supplementary Tables 4, 6 ).
The lower replication rate of trans associations may reflect
various factors, including differences between protein assays (for example,
detection of free versus complexed proteins, Extended
Data Fig. 4 ) and the higher ‘biological prior’ for cis associations.

Of 1,927 pQTLs, 549 (28%) were cis -acting ( Supplementary Table 4 ).
Genetic variants that change protein structure may result in apparent cis pQTLs owing to altered aptamer binding rather than true
quantitative differences in protein levels. We found evidence against such
artefactual associations for 371 (68%) cis pQTLs ( Methods , Supplementary Tables 4, 7, 8 ). The results were materially
unchanged when we repeated downstream analyses but excluded pQTLs without evidence
against binding effects.

The median variation in protein levels explained by pQTLs was 5.8%
(interquartile range: 2.6–12.4%, Fig.
1e ). For 193 proteins, genetic variants explained more than 20% of the
variation. There was a strong inverse relationship between effect size and minor
allele frequency (MAF) ( Fig. 1f ), consistent
with previous genome-wide association studies (GWAS) of quantitative
traits 7 , 10 , 14 . We
found 23 and 208 associations with rare (MAF <1%) and low-frequency (MAF
1–5%) variants, respectively ( Supplementary Table 4 ). Of the 36 strongest associations
(per-allele effect size >1.5 standard deviation (s.d.)), 29 were with rare or
low-frequency variants.

Both cis and trans pQTLs were strongly
enriched for missense variants ( P < 0.0001) and for location
in 3′ untranslated ( P = 0.0025) or splice sites
( P = 0.0004) ( Fig. 1g , Extended Data Fig. 5a ). We found at least
threefold enrichment ( P < 5 × 10 −5 )
of pQTLs at features indicative of transcriptional activation in blood cells and at
hepatocyte regulatory elements, consistent with the role of the liver in protein
synthesis and secretion ( Methods , Extended Data Fig. 6 , Supplementary Table 9 ).

## Overlap of eQTLs and pQTLs
To help evaluate the extent to which genetic associations with plasma
protein levels are driven by effects at the transcriptional level rather than other
mechanisms (for example, altered protein clearance or secretion), we
cross-referenced our cis pQTLs with previous eQTL studies ( Supplementary Table 10 ),
initially defining overlap between an eQTL and pQTL as high linkage disequilibrium
(LD) ( r 2 ≥ 0.8) between the lead pQTL and eQTL
variants. Forty per cent ( n = 224) of cis pQTLs
were eQTLs for the same gene in one or more tissue or cell type ( Supplementary Table 8 ). The
greatest overlaps were in whole blood ( n = 117), liver
( n = 70) and lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs)
( n = 52), consistent with biological expectation, but also
probably driven by the larger eQTL study sample sizes for these cell types. To
investigate whether the same causal variant was likely to underlie overlapping eQTLs
and pQTLs, we performed colocalization testing (see Methods ). Of 228 pQTLs outside the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) region
for which testing was possible, colocalization in one or more tissue or cell type
was highly likely (posterior probability (PP) > 0.8) for 179 (78.5%) and the
most likely explanation (PP > 0.5) for 197 (86.4%) ( Supplementary Table 8 ). cis pQTLs were significantly enriched for eQTLs for the
corresponding gene ( P < 0.0001) ( Methods , Supplementary Table 11 ). To address the converse (that is, to what
extent are eQTLs also pQTLs), we selected well-powered eQTL studies in relevant
tissues (whole blood, LCLs, liver and monocytes 15 – 18 ). Of the
strongest cis eQTLs ( P < 1.5 ×
10 −11 ) in whole blood, LCLs, liver and monocytes, 12.2%,
21.3%, 14.8% and 14.7%, respectively, were plasma cis pQTLs.

Comparisons between eQTL and pQTL studies have inherent limitations,
including differences in the tissues, sample sizes and technological platforms used.
Moreover, plasma protein levels may not reflect levels within tissues or cells.
Nevertheless, our data suggest that genetic effects on plasma protein abundance are
often, but not exclusively, driven by regulation of mRNA. cis pQTLs
without corresponding cis eQTLs may reflect genetic effects on
processes other than transcription, including protein degradation, binding,
secretion, or clearance from circulation.

## transpQTLs identify pathways to disease
Of the 764 protein-associated regions, 262 had trans associations with 1,104 proteins ( Supplementary Tables 4, 12 ). There was no enrichment of cross-reactivity
in SOMAmers with a trans pQTL versus those without ( Supplementary Note ). We
replicated known trans associations, including TMPRSS6 with transferrin receptor protein 1 19 and SORT1 with
granulins 20 , and
identified several novel and biologically plausible trans associations ( Supplementary Table
13 ), including known or presumed ligand–receptor pairs (for
example, the CD320 locus, encoding the transcobalamin receptor, was
associated with transcobalamin-2 levels).

Most trans loci (82%) were associated with fewer than four
proteins, but twelve ‘hotspot’ regions were associated with more than
twenty ( Fig. 1a , Extended Data Fig. 5b ), including well-known pleiotropic loci (for
example, ABO , CFH , APOE and KLKB1 ) and loci associated with many correlated proteins (for
example, the ZFPM2 locus, which encodes the transcription factor
FOG2). Similar pleiotropy at these loci has been seen in other plasma pQTL
studies 3 – 5 , albeit with fewer proteins owing to
limited assay breadth. A missense variant (rs28929474:T) in SERPINA1 was associated with 13 proteins at P < 1.5 × 10 −11 and a further six at P < 5 × 10 −8 ( Fig. 2 ). This variant (the
‘Z-allele’) results in defective secretion and intracellular
accumulation of α1-antitrypsin (A1AT), an anti-protease. Individuals
homozygous for the Z allele have a deficiency of circulating A1AT and an increased
risk of emphysema, liver cirrhosis and vasculitis. The
‘protease–antiprotease’ hypothesis posits that the pulmonary
manifestations of A1AT deficiency result from unchecked protease activity. Our
discovery of multiple trans -associated proteins at this locus
highlights additional pathways that might be relevant to pathogenesis, a hypothesis
supported by accumulating data 21 .

GWAS have identified thousands of loci associated with common diseases, but
the mechanisms by which most variants influence disease susceptibility are unknown.
To identify intermediate links between genotype and disease, we overlapped pQTLs
with disease-associated variants from GWAS. Eighty-eight of our sentinel pQTL
variants were in high LD ( r 2 ≥ 0.8) with sentinel
disease-associated variants ( Supplementary Table 14 ), including 30 with cis associations, 54 with trans , and 4 with both. As some genetic loci
are associated with multiple diseases, these 88 variants represent 253 distinct
genotype–disease associations. Overlap of a pQTL and a disease association
does not necessarily imply that the same genetic variant underlies both traits,
because there may be distinct causal variants for each trait that are in LD. We
therefore performed colocalization testing (see Methods ). Of 108 locus–disease associations outside the major
histocompatibility (MHC) region for which testing was possible, colocalization was
highly likely (PP > 0.8) for 96 (88.9%), and the most likely explanation (PP
> 0.5) for 106 (98.1%) ( Supplementary Table 14 ).

trans pQTLs that overlap with disease associations can
highlight previously unsuspected candidate proteins through which genetic loci may
influence disease risk. To help to identify such candidates, we applied the ProGeM
framework 22 ( Methods , Supplementary Table 12 , Extended
Data Fig. 7 ). We show that an inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) risk
allele 23 (rs3197999:A,
p.Arg703Cys) in MST1 on chromosome 3, which decreases plasma MST1
levels 24 , is a trans pQTL for eight additional proteins ( Supplementary Table 4 , Fig. 3 ). Notably, genes that encode three of
these proteins ( PRDM1 , FASLG and DOCK9 ) each lie within 500 kb of IBD GWAS loci at which the
causal gene is ambiguous 25 . For
instance, the IBD-associated variant rs6911490 lies on chromosome 6 in the
intergenic region near PRDM1 (encoding BLIMP1, a master regulator
of immune cell differentiation) and ATG5 (involved in autophagy)
( Fig. 3c ). Neither fine-mapping nor eQTL
colocalization analyses have unequivocally resolved the causal gene at this
locus 25 ; both PRDM1 and ATG5 are plausible candidates. Our
data provide support for PRDM1 .

Anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody-associated vasculitis (AAV) is an
autoimmune disease characterized by vascular inflammation and autoantibodies to the
neutrophil proteases proteinase-3 (PR3) or myeloperoxidase. GWAS have revealed
distinct genetic associations according to antibody specificity 26 , with variants near PRTN3 (encoding PR3) and at the Z-allele of SERPINA1 (encoding A1AT, which inhibits PR3) associated
specifically with PR3-antibody positive AAV. The SOMAscan assay has two SOMAmers
that target PR3; we identified a cis pQTL immediately upstream of PRTN3 for both, and replicated it with the Olink assay ( Supplementary Table 4 , Fig. 4a, b ). Conditional analysis revealed
multiple independently associated variants ( Supplementary Table 5 ), one of which (rs7254911) was in high LD
with the previously reported 26 , 27 PR3+ vasculitis-associated
variants in the PRTN3 region ( Supplementary Note ). We show
that the vasculitis risk allele at PRTN3 is associated with higher
plasma levels of PR3 ( Supplementary Note Table 4 ).

For one PR3 SOMAmer, we also found a trans pQTL at SERPINA1 , with the Z-allele being associated with reduced
levels of plasma PR3 ( Fig. 4a ). To understand
the SOMAmer-specific nature of this association, we assayed the relative affinity of
these SOMAmers for the free and complexed forms of PR3 and A1AT. We found that the
SOMAmer showing cis and trans associations
predominantly measured the PR3–A1AT complex rather than free PR3, whereas the
SOMAmer with only a cis association measured both the free and
complexed forms ( Extended Data Fig. 8 , Supplementary Note ). Notably,
neither SOMAmer bound free A1AT, demonstrating that the SERPINA1 pQTL did not reflect non-specific cross-reactivity ( Supplementary Note ).

These data show that the vasculitis risk allele at PRTN3 increases total PR3 plasma levels, consistent with its effect on PRTN3 mRNA abundance in whole blood in GTEx data 28 . The SERPINA1 Z-allele results in a reduced proportion of PR3 bound to A1AT. We thus demonstrate
that altered availability of PR3, conferred by two independent genetic mechanisms,
is a key susceptibility factor for breaking immune tolerance to PR3 and the
development of PR3+ vasculitis ( Fig. 4c ).

## Causal evaluation of candidate proteins in disease
Association of plasma protein levels with disease risk does not necessarily
imply causation. To help to establish causality, we used Mendelian randomization
(MR) analysis 11 , which uses
genetic variants as instrumental variables to avoid confounding and reverse
causation ( Extended Data Fig. 9 ). If a genetic
variant is specifically associated with levels of a protein and is also associated
with disease risk, then this provides evidence of the protein’s causal role.
For example, serum levels of PSP-94 (also known as MSMB) are lower in men who go on
to develop prostate cancer 29 , but
it is unclear whether this association is correlative or causal. We identified a cis pQTL associated with lower PSP-94 plasma levels that
overlaps with the prostate cancer susceptibility variant rs10993994 30 , supporting a protective role for
PSP-94 in prostate cancer ( Supplementary Table 14 ).

Next, we leveraged multi-variant MR analysis methods to identify causal
proteins among multiple plausible candidates, exemplified by the IL1RL1–IL18R1 locus, which is associated with multiple
immunemediated diseases including atopic dermatitis 31 . We identified four proteins that each had cis pQTLs at this locus ( Supplementary Table 4 ), and
created a genetic score for each protein (see Methods ). Initial ‘one-protein-at-a-time’ analysis
identified associations of the scores for IL18R1 ( P = 9.3 ×
10 −72 ) and IL1RL1 ( P = 5.7 ×
10 −27 ) with atopic dermatitis risk ( Fig. 5a ), and a weak association for IL1RL2 ( P = 0.013). We then mutually adjusted these associations for one another to account
for the effects of the variants on multiple proteins. Whereas the association of
IL18R1 remained significant ( P = 1.5 ×
10 −28 ), the association of IL1RL1 ( P = 0.01)
was attenuated. In contrast, the association of IL1RL2 ( P = 1.1
× 10 −69 ) became much stronger, suggesting that IL1RL2 and
IL18R1 underlie atopic dermatitis risk at this locus.

MMP-12 plays a key role in lung tissue damage, and MMP-12 inhibitors are
being tested as treatments for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 32 . We created a multi-allelic
genetic score that explains 14% of the variation in plasma MMP-12 levels (see Methods ). Observational studies reveal that
higher levels of plasma MMP-12 are associated with recurrent cardiovascular
events 33 , stimulating
interest in the use of MMP-12 inhibitors to treat cardiovascular disease. However,
we found that genetic predisposition to higher MMP-12 levels is associated with
decreased coronary disease risk ( P = 2.8 ×
10 −13 ) ( Fig. 5b ) and
decreased large artery atherosclerotic stroke risk 34 . It will be important to understand the
discordance between the observational epidemiology and the genetic risk score, given
the therapeutic interest in this target.

## Drug target prioritization
Drugs directed at targets with human genetic support have a greater
likelihood of therapeutic success than those directed at unsupported
targets 35 . Of the proteins
for which we identified a pQTL, 244 (17%) are established drug targets in the
Informa Pharmaprojects database ( Supplementary Table 15 ). Thirty-one pQTLs for drug target proteins were
highly likely to colocalize (PP > 0.8) with a GWAS disease locus, including
some that are targets of approved drugs such as tocilizumab (anti-IL6R) and
ustekinumab (anti-IL12/23) ( Supplementary Table 16a ).

To identify additional indications for existing drugs, we investigated
disease associations of pQTLs for proteins already targeted by licensed drugs. Our
results suggest potential drug repurposing opportunities. For example, we identified
a cis pQTL for RANK (encoded by TNFRSF11A ) at
rs884205, a variant associated with Paget’s disease 36 , which is characterized by excessive bone
turnover, deformity and fracture ( Supplementary Table 16b ). The standard treatment for Paget’s
disease is osteoclast inhibition with bisphosphonates, originally developed as
anti-osteoporotic drugs. Denosumab, another anti-osteoporosis drug, is a monoclonal
antibody targeting RANKL, the ligand for RANK. Our data suggest that denosumab may
be an alternative treatment for Paget’s disease when bisphosphonates are
contraindicated, a hypothesis supported by clinical case reports 37 .

Next we evaluated targets of drugs currently under development. Drugs
targeting GP1BA, a receptor for von Willebrand factor, are in preclinical
development as anti-thrombotic agents and in phase 2 trials for thrombotic
thrombocytopenic purpura. We found a cis pQTL associated with both
higher GP1BA abundance and higher platelet count, suggesting a link between GP1BA
and platelet count ( Supplementary
Table 16 ). Furthermore, we identified a trans pQTL for
GP1BA at the SH2B3 – BRAP locus, which
colocalized with associations with platelet count 10 , myocardial infarction and stroke ( Supplementary Table 16b ). The
risk allele for cardiovascular disease increases both plasma GP1BA and platelet
count, suggesting that GP1BA influences vascular risk via platelets. Collectively,
these results support targeting GP1BA in conditions characterized by platelet
aggregation such as arterial thrombosis. More generally, our data provide a
substrate for generating hypotheses about potential therapeutic targets through
linking genetic factors to disease via specific proteins.

## Discussion
This study elucidates the genetic control of the human plasma proteome and
uncovers intermediate molecular pathways that connect the genome to disease
endpoints. We applied our discoveries to evaluate causal roles for proteins in human
diseases using the principle of Mendelian randomization. Proteins provide an ideal
paradigm for MR analysis because they are under proximal genetic control. However,
application of protein-based MR has been constrained by limited availability of
suitable genetic instruments, a bottleneck remedied by our approach. Our study
provides a resource for understanding complex traits and an example of the
application of novel bioassay technologies to population biobanks.

## Online content
Any Methods, including any statements of data availability and Nature
Research reporting summaries, along with any additional references and Source Data
files, are available in the online version of the paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-018-0175-2

## Methods
The INTERVAL study comprises about 50,000 participants nested within a
randomized trial of varying blood donation intervals 9 . Between mid-2012 and mid-2014, blood donors
aged 18 years and older were recruited at 25 centres of England’s
National Health Service Blood and Transplant (NHSBT). All participants gave
informed consent before joining the study and the National Research Ethics
Service approved this study (11/EE/0538). Participants completed an online
questionnaire including questions about demographic characteristics (for
example, age, sex, ethnicity), anthropometry (height, weight), lifestyle (for
example, alcohol and tobacco consumption) and diet. Participants were generally
in good health because blood donation criteria exclude people with a history of
major diseases (such as myocardial infarction, stroke, cancer, HIV, and
hepatitis B or C) and those who have had recent illness or infection. For
SomaLogic assays, we randomly selected two non-overlapping subcohorts of 2,731
and 831 participants from INTERVAL. After genetic quality control, 3,301
participants (2,481 and 820 in the two subcohorts) remained for analysis ( Supplementary Table 17 ).
No statistical methods were used to determine sample size. The experiments were
not randomized. Laboratory staff conducting proteomic assays were blinded to the
genotypes of participants.

Sample collection procedures for INTERVAL have been described
previously 38 . In
brief, blood samples for research purposes were collected in 6-ml EDTA tubes
using standard venepuncture protocols. The tubes were inverted three times and
transferred at ambient temperature to UK Biocentre (Stockport, UK) for
processing. Plasma was extracted into two 0.8-ml plasma aliquots by
centrifugation and subsequently stored at −80 °C before use.

We used a multiplexed, aptamer-based approach (SOMAscan assay) to
measure the relative concentrations of 3,622 plasma proteins or protein
complexes assayed using 4,034 modified aptamers (‘SOMAmer
reagents’, hereafter referred to as SOMAmers; Supplementary Table 18 ).
The assay extends the lower limit of detectable protein abundance afforded by
conventional approaches (for example, immunoassays), measuring both
extracellular and intracellular proteins (including soluble domains of
membrane-associated proteins), with a bias towards proteins likely to be found
in the human secretome 8 , 39 ( Extended Data Fig. 10a ). The proteins cover a wide range of
molecular functions ( Extended Data Fig.
10b ). The selection of proteins on the platform reflects both the
availability of purified protein targets and a focus on proteins suspected to be
involved in the pathophysiology of human disease.

Aliquots of 150 μl of plasma were sent on dry ice to SomaLogic
Inc. (Boulder, Colorado, US) for protein measurement. Assay details have been
previously described 39 , 40 and a technical white paper
with further information can be found at the manufacturer’s website
( http://somalogic.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/06/SSM-002-Technical-White-Paper_010916_LSM1.pdf ).
In brief, modified single-stranded DNA SOMAmers are used to bind to specific
protein targets that are then quantified using a DNA microarray. Protein
concentrations are quantified as relative fluorescent units.

Quality control (QC) was performed at the sample and SOMAmer levels
using control aptamers and calibrator samples. At the sample level,
hybridization controls on the microarray were used to correct for systematic
variability in hybridization, while the median signal over all features assigned
to one of three dilution sets (40%, 1% and 0.005%) was used to correct for
within-run technical variability. The resulting hybridization scale factors and
median scale factors were used to normalize data across samples within a run.
The acceptance criteria for these values are between 0.4 and 2.5 based on
historical runs. SOMAmer-level QC made use of replicate calibrator samples using
the same study matrix (plasma) to correct for between-run variability. The
acceptance criterion for each SOMAmer was that the calibration scale factor be
less than 0.4 from the median for each of the plates run. In addition, at the
plate level, the acceptance criteria were that the median of the calibration
scale factors be between 0.8 and 1.2, and that 95% of individual SOMAmers be
less than 0.4 from the median within the plate.

In addition to QC processes routinely conducted by SomaLogic, we
measured protein levels of 30 and 10 pooled plasma samples randomly distributed
across plates for subcohort 1 and subcohort 2, respectively. Laboratory
technicians were blinded to the presence of pooled samples. This approach
enabled estimation of the reproducibility of the protein assays. We calculated
the coefficient of variation (CV) for each SOMAmer within each subcohort by
dividing the standard deviation by the mean of the pooled plasma sample protein
read-outs. In addition to passing SomaLogic QC processes, we required SOMAmers
to have a CV ≤ 20% in both subcohorts. Eight non-human protein targets
were also excluded, leaving 3,283 SOMAmers (mapping to 2,994 unique proteins or
protein complexes) for inclusion in the GWAS.

Protein mapping to UniProt identifiers and gene names was provided by
SomaLogic. Mapping to Ensembl gene IDs and genomic positions was performed using
Ensembl Variant Effect Predictor v83 (VEP) 41 . Protein subcellular locations were determined by
exporting the subcellular location annotations from UniProt 42 . If the term
‘membrane’ was included in the descriptor, the protein was
considered to be a membrane protein, whereas if the term
‘secreted’ (but not ‘membrane’) was included in the
descriptor, the protein was considered to be a secreted protein. Proteins not
annotated as either membrane or secreted proteins were classified (by inference)
as intracellular proteins. Proteins were mapped to molecular functions using
gene ontology annotations 43 from UniProt.

To provide confidence in the reproducibility of the protein assays, we
attempted to replicate the associations with age or sex of 45 proteins
previously reported by Ngo et al. and 40 reported by Menni et al. 44 , 45 . We used Bonferroni-corrected P value
thresholds of P = 1.1 × 10 −3 (0.05/45)
and P = 1.2 × 10 −3 (0.05/40),
respectively. Relative protein abundances were rank-inverse normalized within
each subcohort and linear regression was performed using age, sex, body mass
index, natural log of estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) and subcohort
as independent variables.

The genotyping protocol and QC for the INTERVAL samples
( n ≈ 50,000) have been described previously in
detail 10 . DNA
extracted from buffy coat was used to assay approximately 830,000 variants on
the Affymetrix Axiom UK Biobank genotyping array at Affymetrix (Santa Clara,
California, US). Genotyping was performed in multiple batches of approximately
4,800 samples each. Sample QC was performed including exclusions for sex
mismatches, low call rates, duplicate samples, extreme heterozygosity and
non-European descent. Relatedness was removed by excluding one participant from
each pair of close (first- or second-degree) relatives, defined as π ^ > 0.187. Identity-by-descent was estimated using a
subset of variants with a call rate >99% and MAF > 5% in the
merged data set of both subcohorts, pruned for linkage disequilibrium (LD) using
PLINK v1.9 46 . Numbers of
participants excluded at each stage of the genetic QC are summarized in Extended Data Fig. 1 . Multi-dimensional
scaling was performed using PLINK v1.9 to create components to account for
ancestry in genetic analyses.

Prior to imputation, additional variant filtering steps were performed
to establish a high-quality imputation scaffold. In summary, 654,966
high-quality variants (auto-somal, non-monomorphic, bi-allelic variants with
Hardy–Weinberg Equilibrium (HWE) P > 5 ×
10 −6 , with a call rate of >99% across the INTERVAL
genotyping batches in which a variant passed QC, and a global call rate of
>75% across all INTERVAL genotyping batches) were used for imputation.
Variants were phased using SHAPEIT3 and imputed using a combined 1000 Genomes
Phase 3-UK10K reference panel. Imputation was performed via the Sanger
Imputation Server ( https://imputation.sanger.ac.uk ) and resulted in 87,696,888
imputed variants.

Prior to genetic association testing, variants were filtered in each
subcohort separately using the following exclusion criteria: (1) imputation
quality (INFO) score <0.7; (2) minor allele count <8; (3) HWE P < 5 × 10 −6 . In the small
number of cases in which imputed variants had the same genomic position (GRCh37)
and alleles, the variant with the lowest INFO score was removed. 10,572,788
variants passing all filters in both subcohorts were taken forward for analysis
( Extended Data Fig. 1 ).

Within each subcohort, relative protein abundances were first natural
log-transformed. Log-transformed protein levels were then adjusted in a linear
regression for age, sex, duration between blood draw and processing (binary,
≤1 day/>1day) and the first three principal components of ancestry
from multi-dimensional scaling. The protein residuals from this linear
regression were then rank-inverse normalized and used as phenotypes for
association testing. Simple linear regression using an additive genetic model
was used to test genetic associations. Association tests were carried out on
allelic dosages to account for imputation uncertainty (‘-method
expected’ option) using SNPTEST v2.5.2 47 .

Association results from the two subcohorts were combined via
fixed-effects inverse-variance meta-analysis combining the betas and standard
errors using METAL 48 . Genetic
associations were considered to be genome-wide significant based on a
conservative strategy requiring associations to have (i) a meta-analysis P value < 1.5 × 10 −11 (genome-wide threshold of P = 5 × 10 −8 Bonferroni-corrected for 3,283 aptamers tested), (ii) at least nominal
significance ( P < 0.05) in both subcohorts, and (iii)
consistent direction of effect across subcohorts. We did not observe significant
genomic inflation (mean inflation factor was 1.0, standard deviation = 0.01)
( Extended Data Fig. 3d ).

To identify distinct non-overlapping regions associated with a given
SOMAmer, we first defined a 1-Mb region around each significant variant for that
SOMAmer. Starting with the region containing the variant with the smallest P value, any overlapping regions were then merged and this
process was repeated until no more overlapping 1-Mb regions remained. The
variant with the lowest P value for each region was assigned as
the ‘regional sentinel variant’. Owing to the complexity of the
MHC region, we treated the extended MHC region (chr6:25.5–34.0Mb) as one
region. To identify whether a region was associated with multiple SOMAmers, we
used an LD-based clumping approach. Regional sentinel variants in high LD
( r 2 ≥ 0.8) with each other were combined
together into a single region.

To identify conditionally significant associations, we performed
approximate genome-wide stepwise conditional analysis using GCTA
v1.25.2 49 using the
‘cojo-slct’ option. We used the same conservative significance
threshold of P = 1.5 × 10 −11 as for
the univariable analysis. As inputs for GCTA, we used the summary statistics
(that is, betas and standard errors) from the meta-analysis. Correlation between
variants was estimated using the ‘hard-called’ genotypes (where a
genotype was called if it had a posterior probability of >0.9 following
imputation or set to missing otherwise) in the merged genetic data set, and only
variants also passing the univariable genome-wide threshold ( P < 1.5 × 10 −11 ) were considered for stepwise
selection. As the conditional analyses use different data inputs to the
univariable analysis (that is, summarized rather than individual-level data),
there were some instances where the conditional analysis failed to include in
the stepwise selection sentinel variants that were only just statistically
significant in the univariable analysis. In these instances ( n = 28), we re-conducted the joint model estimation without stepwise selection in
GCTA, using the variants identified by the conditional analysis in addition to
the regional sentinel variant. We report and highlight these cases in Supplementary Table
5 .

We attempted to identify all previously reported pQTLs from GWAS and to
assess whether they replicated in our study. We used the NCBI Entrez programming
utility in R (rentrez) to perform a literature search for pQTL studies published
from 2008 onwards. We searched for the following terms: ‘pQTL’,
‘pQTLs’, and ‘protein quantitative trait locus’. We
supplemented this search by filtering out GWAS associations from the NHGRI-EBI
GWAS Catalog v.1.0.1 50 ( https://www.ebi.ac.uk/gwas/ , downloaded November 2017), which
has all phenotypes mapped to the Experimental Factor Ontology (EFO) 51 , by restricting to those with
EFO annotations relevant to protein biomarkers (for example, ‘protein
measurement’, EFO_0004747). Studies identified through both approaches
were manually filtered to include only studies that profiled plasma or serum
samples and to exclude studies not assessing proteins. We recorded basic summary
information for each study including the assay used, sample size and number of
proteins with pQTLs ( Supplementary Table 19 ). To reduce the impact of ethnic differences
in allele frequencies on replication rate estimates, we filtered studies to
include only associations reported in European-ancestry populations. We then
manually extracted summary data on all reported associations from the manuscript
or the supplementary
material . This included rsID, protein UniProt ID, P values, and whether the association was cis or trans ( Supplementary Table 20 ).

To assess replication we first identified the set of unique UniProt IDs
that were also assayed on the SOMAscan panel. For previous studies that used
SomaLogic technology, we refined this match to the specific aptamer used. We
then clumped associations into distinct loci using the same method that we
applied to our pQTLs (see ‘Refinement of significant regions’).
For each locus, we asked whether the sentinel SNP or a proxy
( r 2 > 0.6) was associated with the same
protein (or aptamer) in our study at a defined significance threshold. For our
primary assessment, we used a P value threshold of
10 −4 ( Supplementary Table 21 ). We also performed sensitivity analyses to
explore factors that influence replication rate ( Supplementary Note ).

To test replication of 163 pQTLs for 116 proteins, we performed protein
measurements using an alternative assay, that is, a proximity extension assay
method (Olink Bioscience, Uppsala, Sweden) 13 in an additional subcohort of 4,998 INTERVAL
participants. Proteins were measured using three 92-protein
‘panels’ – ‘inflammatory’,
‘cvd2’ and ‘cvd3’ (10 proteins were assayed on more
than 1 panel). 4,902, 4,947 and 4,987 samples passed quality control for the
‘inflammatory’, ‘cvd2’ and ‘cvd3’
panels, respectively, of which 712, 715 and 721 samples were from individuals
included in our primary pQTL analysis using the SOMAscan assay. Normalized
protein levels (‘NPX’) were regressed on age, sex, plate, time
from blood draw to processing (in days), and season (categorical:
‘Spring’, ‘Summer’, ‘Autumn’,
‘Winter’). The residuals were then rank-inverse normalized.
Genotype data was processed as described earlier. Linear regression of the
rank-inversed normalized residuals on genotype was carried out in SNPTEST with
the first three components of multi-dimensional scaling as covariates to adjust
for ancestry. pQTLs were considered to have replicated if they met a P value threshold Bonferroni-corrected for the number of
tests ( P < 3.1 × 10 −4 ;
0.05/163) and had a directionally concordant beta estimate with the SOMAscan
estimate.

We defined a pQTL as cis when the most significantly
associated variant in the region was located within 1 Mb of the TSS of the
gene(s) encoding the protein. pQTLs lying outside of this region were defined as trans . When considering the distance of the lead cis -associated variant from the relevant TSS, only proteins
that mapped to single genes on the primary assembly in Ensembl v83 were
considered.

For trans pQTLs, we sought to prioritize candidate
genes in the region that might underpin the genotype–protein association.
We applied the ProGeM framework 22 , which leverages a combination of databases of molecular
pathways, protein–protein interaction networks, and variant annotation,
as well as functional genomic data including eQTL and chromosome conformation
capture. In addition to reporting the nearest gene to the sentinel variant,
ProGeM employs complementary ‘bottom up’ and ‘top
down’ approaches, starting from the variant and protein respectively. For
the ‘bottom up’ approach, the sentinel variant and corresponding
proxies ( r 2 > 0.8) for each trans pQTL were first annotated using Ensembl VEP v83
(using the ‘pick’ option) to determine whether variants were (1)
protein-altering coding variants; (2) synonymous coding or 5′/3′
untranslated region (UTR); (3) intronic or up/downstream; or (4) intergenic.
Second, we queried all sentinel variants and proxies against significant cis eQTL variants (defined by beta distribution-adjusted
empirical P values using an FDR threshold of 0.05, see http://www.gtex-portal.org/home/documentationPage for details)
in any cell type or tissue from the Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) project
v6 28 ( http://www.gtexportal.org/home/datasets ). Third, we also queried
promoter capture Hi-C data in 17 human primary haematopoietic cell
types 52 to identify
contacts (with a CHiCAGO score >5 in at least one cell type) involving
chromosomal regions containing a sentinel variant. We considered gene promoters
annotated on either fragment (that is, the fragment containing the sentinel
variant or the other corresponding fragment) as potential candidate genes. Using
these three sources of information, we generated a list of candidate genes for
the trans pQTLs. A gene was considered a candidate if it
fulfilled at least one of the following criteria: (1) it was proximal
(intragenic or ± 5 kb from the gene) or nearest to the sentinel variant;
(2) it contained a sentinel or proxy variant ( r 2 > 0.8) that was protein-altering; (3) it had a significant cis eQTL in at least one GTEx tissue overlapping with a
sentinel pQTL variant (or proxy); or (4) it was regulated by a promoter
annotated on either fragment of a chromosomal contact 52 involving a sentinel variant.

For the ‘top down’ approach, we first identified all genes
with a TSS located within the corresponding pQTL region using the GenomicRanges
Bioconductor package 53 with
annotation from a GRCh37 GTF file from Ensembl
(ftp://ftp.ensembl.org/pub/grch37/update/gtf/homo_sapiens; file:
‘Homo_sapiens. GRCh37.82.gtf.gz’, downloaded June 2016). We then
identified any local genes that had previously been linked with the
corresponding trans -associated protein(s) according to the
following open source databases: (1) the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man
(OMIM) catalogue 54 ( http://www.omim.org/ ); (2) the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and
Genomes (KEGG) 55 ( http://www.genome.jp/kegg/ ); and (3) STRINGdb 56 ( http://string-db.org/;v10.0 ). We accessed OMIM data via
HumanMine web tool 57 ( http://www.humanmine.org/ ; accessed June 2016), whereby we
extracted all OMIM IDs for (i) our trans -affected proteins and
(ii) genes local (± 500 kb) to the corresponding trans -acting variant. We extracted all human KEGG pathway IDs
using the KEGGREST Bioconductor package ( https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/KEGGREST.html ).
In cases where a trans -associated protein shared either an OMIM
ID or a KEGG pathway ID with a gene local to the corresponding trans -acting variant, we took this as evidence of a
potential functional involvement of that gene. We interrogated
protein–protein interaction data by accessing STRINGdb data using the
STRINGdb Bioconductor package 58 , whereby we extracted all pairwise interaction scores for
each trans -affected protein and all proteins with genes local
to the corresponding trans -acting variants. We took the default
interaction score of 400 as evidence of an interaction between the proteins,
therefore indicating a possible functional involvement for the local gene. In
addition to using data from open source databases in our top down approach, we
also adopted a ‘guilt-by-association’ (GbA) approach using the
same plasma proteomic data used to identify our pQTLs. We first generated a
matrix containing all possible pairwise Pearson’s correlation
coefficients between our 3,283 SOMAmers. We then extracted the coefficients
relating to our trans -associated proteins and any proteins
encoded by genes local to their corresponding trans -acting
variants (where available). Where the correlation coefficient was ≥0.5 we
prioritized the relevant local genes as being potential mediators of the trans association(s) at that locus.

We report the potential candidate genes for our trans pQTLs from both the ‘bottom up’ and ‘top down’
approaches, highlighting cases where the same gene was highlighted by both
approaches.

Functional annotation of variants was performed using Ensembl VEP v83
using the ‘pick’ option. We tested the enrichment of significant
pQTL variants for certain functional classes by comparing to permuted sets of
variants showing no significant association with any protein ( P > 0.0001 for all proteins tested). First, the regional sentinel variants
were LD-pruned at r 2 of 0.1. Each time the sentinel
variants were LD-pruned, one of the pairs of correlated variants was removed at
random and for each set of LD-pruned sentinel variants, 100 equally sized sets
of null permuted variants were sampled matching for MAF (bins of 5%), distance
to TSS (bins of 0–0.5 kb, 0.5–2 kb, 2–5 kb, 5–10 kb,
10–20 kb, 20–100 kb and >100 kb in each direction) and LD
(± half the number of variants in LD with the sentinel variant at r 2 of 0.8). This procedure was repeated 100
times resulting in 10,000 permuted sets of variants. An empirical P value was calculated as the proportion of permuted
variant sets where the proportion that is classified as a particular functional
group exceeded that of the test set of sentinel pQTL variants, and we used a
significance threshold of P = 0.005 (0.05/10 functional classes
tested).

All protein assays that rely on binding (for example, of antibodies or
SOMAmers) are susceptible to the possibility of binding-affinity effects, where
protein-altering variants (PAVs) (or their proxies in LD) are associated with
protein measurements owing to differential binding rather than differences in
protein abundance. To account for this potential effect, we performed
conditional analysis at all cis pQTLs where the sentinel
variant was in LD ( r 2 ≥ 0.1 and r 2 ≤ 0.9) with a PAV in the gene(s)
encoding the associated protein. First, variants were annotated with Ensembl VEP
v83 using the ‘per-gene’ option. Variant annotations were
considered protein-altering if they were annotated as coding sequence variant,
frameshift variant, in-frame deletion, in-frame insertion, missense variant,
protein altering variant, splice acceptor variant, splice donor variant, splice
region variant, start lost, stop gained, or stop lost. To avoid
multi-collinearity, PAVs were LD-pruned ( r 2 >
0.9) using PLINK v1.9 before including them as covariates in the conditional
analysis on the meta-analysis summary statistics using GCTA v1.25.2. Coverage of
known common (MAF >5%) PAVs in our data was checked by comparison with
exome sequences from ~60,000 individuals in the Exome Aggregation
Consortium (ExAC ( http://exac.broadinstitute.org ), downloaded June 2016) 59 .

We tested whether our pQTLs were enriched for functional and regulatory
characteristics using GARFIELD v1.2.0 60 . GARFIELD is a non-parametric permutation-based
enrichment method that compares input variants to permuted sets matched for
number of proxies ( r 2 ≥ 0.8), MAF and
distance to the closest TSS. It first applies ‘greedy pruning’
( r 2 < 0.1) within a 1-Mb region of the
most significant variant. GARFIELD annotates variants with more than a thousand
features, drawn predominantly from the GENCODE, ENCODE and ROADMAP projects,
which includes genic annotations, histone modifications, chromatin states and
other regulatory features across a wide range of tissues and cell types.

The enrichment analysis was run using all variants that passed our
Bonferroni-adjusted significance threshold ( P < 1.5
× 10 −11 ) for association with any protein. For each of
the matching criteria (MAF, distance to TSS, number of LD proxies), we used five
bins. In total we tested 25 combinations of features (classified as
transcription factor binding sites, FAIRE-seq, chromatin states, histone
modifications, footprints, hotspots, or peaks) with up to 190 cell types from 57
tissues, leading to 998 tests. Hence, we considered enrichment with P < 5 × 10 −5 (0.05/998) to
be statistically significant.

To identify diseases with which our pQTLs have been associated, we
queried our sentinel variants and their strong proxies
( r 2 ≥ 0.8) against publicly available
disease GWAS data using PhenoScanner 61 . A list of data sets queried is available at http://www.phenoscanner.medschl.cam.ac.uk/information.html . For
disease GWAS, results were filtered to P < 5 ×
10 −8 and then manually curated to retain only the entry
with the strongest evidence for association (that is, smallest P value) per disease. Non-disease phenotypes such as
anthropometric traits, intermediate biomarkers and lipids were excluded
manually.

For each regional sentinel cis pQTL variant, its strong
proxies ( r 2 ≥ 0.8) were queried against
publicly available eQTL association data using PhenoScanner. cis eQTL results were filtered to retain only variants with P < 1.5 × 10 −11 . Only cis eQTLs for the same gene as the cis pQTL protein were retained. We tested whether cis pQTLs were
significantly enriched for eQTLs for the corresponding gene compared to null
sets of variants appropriately matched for MAF and distance to nearest TSS. For
this analysis, we restricted eQTL data to GTEx project v6, since this project
provided complete summary statistics across a wide range of tissues and
cell-types, in contrast to many other studies which only report P values below some significance level. GTEx results were
filtered to contain only variants lying in cis (that is, within
1 Mb) of genes that encode proteins analysed in our study and only variants in
both data sets were used.

For the enrichment analysis, the cis pQTL sentinel
variants were first LD-pruned ( r 2 < 0.1) and
the proportion of sentinel cis pQTL variants that are also
eQTLs at our pQTL significance threshold ( P < 1.5
× 10 −11 ), conventional genome-wide significance
( P < 5 × 10 −8 ) or a nominal P value threshold ( P < 1 ×
10 −5 ) for the same protein or gene was compared to a
permuted set of variants that were not pQTLs ( P > 0.0001
for all proteins). We generated 10,000 permuted sets of null variants for each
significance threshold matched for MAF, distance to TSS and LD (as described for
functional annotation enrichment in ‘Functional annotation of
pQTLs’). An empirical P value was calculated as the
proportion of permuted variant sets where the proportion that are also cis eQTLs exceeded that of the test set of sentinel cis pQTL variants.

At a stringent eQTL significance threshold ( P <
1.5 × 10−11), we found significant enrichment of cis pQTLs for eQTLs ( P < 0.0001)
( Supplementary Table
11 ) with 19.5% overlap observed compared to a mean overlap of 1.8% in
the null sets. Results were similar in sensitivity analyses using the standard
genome-wide or nominal significance thresholds as well as when using only the
sentinel variants at cis pQTLs that were robust to adjusting
for PAVs ( Supplementary Table
7 ), suggesting our results are robust to the choice of threshold and
potential differential binding effects.

Colocalization testing was performed using the coloc package 62 . For testing colocalization of
pQTLs and disease associations, colocalization testing was necessarily limited
to disease traits for which full GWAS summary statistics had been made
available. We obtained GWAS summary statistics through PhenoScanner. For testing
colocalization of pQTLs with eQTLs, we used publically available summary
statistics for expression traits from GTEx 28 . We used the default priors. Regions for testing were
determined by dividing the genome into 0.1-cM chunks using recombination data.
Evidence for colocalization was assessed using the posterior probability (PP)
for hypothesis 4 (that there is an association for both traits and they are
driven by the same causal variant(s)). Associations with PP4 > 0.5 were
deemed likely to colocalize as this gives hypothesis 4 the highest likelihood of
being correct, while PP4 > 0.8 was deemed to be ‘highly likely to
colocalize’.

In MR, genetic variants are used as ‘instrumental
variables’ (IVs) for assessing the causal effect of the exposure (here a
plasma protein) on the outcome (here a disease) 11 , 63 ( Extended Data Fig. 9 ).

To identify the likely causal proteins that underpin the previous
genetic association of the IL1RL1–IL18R1 locus
(chr11:102.5–103.5Mb) with atopic dermatitis (AD) 31 , we used the following
approach. For each protein encoded by a gene in the IL1RL1–IL18R1 locus, we took genetic variants that
had a cis association at P < 1 ×
10 −4 and ‘LD-pruned’ them at r 2 < 0.1 to leave largely independent
variants. We then used these genetic variants to construct a genetic score for
each protein. Formally, we used these variants as instrumental variables for
their respective proteins in univariable MR. For multivariable MR, association
estimates for all proteins in the locus were extracted for all instruments. We
used PhenoScanner to obtain association statistics for the selected variants in
the European-ancestry population of a recent large-scale GWAS meta-analysis of
AD 31 . Where the
relevant variant was not available, the strongest proxy with r 2 ≥ 0.8 was used.

To test whether plasma MMP-12 levels have a causal effect on risk of
CHD, we selected genetic variants in the MMP12 gene region to
use as instrumental variables. We constructed a genetic score comprising 17
variants that had a cis association with MMP-12 levels at P < 5 × 10 −8 and that were
not highly correlated with one another ( r 2 <
0.2). To perform multivariable MR, we used association estimates for these
variants with other MMP proteins in the locus (MMP-1, MMP-7, MMP-8, MMP-10,
MMP-13). Summary associations for variants in the score with CHD were obtained
through PhenoScanner from a recent large-scale GWAS meta-analysis which
consisted mostly (77%) of individuals of European ancestry 64 .

Two-sample univariable MR was performed for each protein separately
using summary statistics in the inverse-variance weighted method adapted to
account for correlated variants 65 , 66 . For each of G genetic variants ( g =1, …, G ) having per-allele estimate of the association with the
protein β Xg and standard error σ Xg , and per-allele estimate of the
association with the outcome (here, AD or CHD) β Yg and standard error σ Yg , the IV estimate ( θ ⌢ X Y ) is obtained from generalized weighted linear
regression of the genetic associations with the outcome
( β Y ) on the genetic associations with
the protein ( β X ) weighting for the precisions
of the genetic associations with the outcome and accounting for correlations
between the variants according to the regression model: β Y = θ X Y β X + ε , ε ~ N ( 0 , Ω ) where β y and β x are vectors of the univariable
(marginal) genetic associations, and the weighting matrix Ω has terms
Ω g 1 g 2 = σ Yg 1 σ Yg 2 ρ g 1 g 2 ,
and ρ g 1 g 2 is the correlation between the g 1 th and g 2 th variants.

The IV estimate from this method is: θ ^ X Y = ( β X T Ω − 1 β X ) − 1 β X T Ω − 1 β Y and the standard error is: se ( θ ^ X Y ) = ( β X T Ω − 1 β X ) − 1 where T is a matrix
transpose. This is the estimate and standard error from the regression model
fixing the residual standard error to 1 (equivalent to a fixed-effects model in
a meta-analysis).

Genetic variants in univariable MR need to satisfy three key assumptions
to be valid instruments: (1) the variant is associated with the risk factor of
interest (that is, the protein level), (2) the variant is not associated with
any confounder of the risk factor-outcome association, and (3) the variant is
conditionally independent of the outcome given the risk factor and
confounders.

To account for potential effects of functional pleiotropy 67 , we performed multivariable MR
using the weighted regression-based method proposed by Burgess et al. 68 . For each of K risk factors in the model ( k =
1,…, K ), the weighted regression-based method is
performed by multivariable generalized weighted linear regression of the
association estimates β Y on each of the
association estimates with each risk factor β Xk in a single regression model: β Y = θ X Y 1 β X 1 + θ X Y 2 β X 2 + ... + θ X Y K β X K + ε , ε ~ N ( 0 , Ω ) where β X 1 is the vectors of the
univariable genetic associations with risk factor 1, and so on. This regression
model is implemented by first pre-multiplying the association vectors by the
Cholesky decomposition of the weighting matrix, and then applying standard
linear regression to the transformed vectors. Estimates and standard errors are
obtained fixing the residual standard error to be 1 as above.

The multivariable MR analysis allows the estimation of the causal effect
of a protein on disease outcome accounting for the fact that genetic variants
may be associated with multiple proteins in the region. Causal estimates from
multivariable MR represent direct causal effects, representing the effect of
intervening on one risk factor in the model while keeping others constant.

We performed two sensitivity analyses to determine the robustness of the
MR findings. First, we measured plasma MMP-12 levels using a different method
(proximity extension assay; Olink Bioscience, Uppsala, Sweden 13 ) in 4,998 individuals, and
used this to derive genotype-MMP12 effect estimates for the 17 variants in our
genetic score. Second, we obtained effect estimates from a pQTL study based on
SOMAscan assay measurements in an independent sample of ~1,000
individuals 3 . In both
cases the genetic score reflecting higher plasma MMP-12 was associated with
lower risk of CHD.

We used the Informa Pharmaprojects data-base from Citeline to obtain
information on drugs that target proteins assayed on the SOMAscan platform. This
is a manually curated database that maintains profiles for >60,000 drugs.
For our analysis, we focused on the following information for each drug: protein
target, indications, and development status. We included drugs across the
development pipeline, including those in pre-clinical studies or with no
development reported, drugs in clinical trials (all phases), and
launched/registered drugs. For each protein assayed, we identified all drugs in
the Informa Pharmaprojects with a matching protein target based on UniProt ID.
When multiple drugs targeted the same protein, we selected the drug with the
latest stage of development.

For drug targets with significant pQTLs, we identified the subset where
the sentinel variant or proxy variants in LD ( r 2 > 0.8) are also associated with disease risk through PhenoScanner. We
used an internal Merck auto-encoding method to map GWAS traits and drug
indications to a common set of terms from the Medical Dictionary for Regulatory
Activities (MedDRA). MedDRA terms are organized into a hierarchy with five
levels. We mapped each GWAS trait and indication onto the ‘lowest level
terms’ (that is, the most specific terms available). All matching terms
were recorded for each trait or indication. We matched GWAS traits to drug
indications on the basis of the highest level of the hierarchy, called
‘system organ class’ (SOC). We designated a protein as
‘matching’ if at least one GWAS trait term matched with at least
one indication term for at least one drug.

## Extended Data
SDS–PAGE with Alexa-647-labelled proteins captured by the
IL1RL2 SOMAmer ( a ) or GP1BA SOMAmer ( b ). For each
protein target, the protein captured by the SOMAmer is compared to the
standard. The cognate targets are the only ones with protein visible in the
capture lanes, whereas the proteins homologous to the target proteins show
no evidence of binding. These experiments were performed once. MW markers,
molecular weight markers.

a , Distribution of coefficients of variation of all
proteins on the SOMAscan assay in each subcohort. b ,
Spearman’s correlations for all proteins passing QC derived from
contemporaneous assay of baseline and two-year samples from 60 participants. c , Scatterplot of pQTL effect size estimates from SOMAscan
versus Olink showing all 163 pQTLs tested (top) and the 106 that replicated
(bottom). r is Pearson’s correlation coefficient. d , Distribution of inflation factors across proteins that
underwent genome-wide association testing, stratified by subcohort and
allele frequency (MAF ≥ 5%, MAF < 5%).

a , Regional association plots of the trans pQTL (sentinel variant rs11079936) for GDF11/8
before and after adjusting for levels of WFIKKN2 (upper panels), and the
WFIKKN2 cis pQTL after adjusting for GDF11/8 levels (bottom
panel). A similar pattern of association for WFIKKN2 was seen before GDF11/8
adjustment (not shown). b , Attenuation of the GDF11/8 trans pQTL upon adjustment for plasma levels of the cis protein WFIKKN2.

pQTL mapping in n = 3,301 individuals. a , Distribution of the predicted consequences of the
sentinel pQTL variants compared to matched permuted null sets of variants,
stratified by cis and trans . Asterisks
indicate empirical enrichment using a permutation test (10,000 permuted sets
of non-associated variants) at a Bonferroni-corrected significance value
( P < 0.005). Bar height represents the mean
proportion of variants within each class and error bars reflect one standard
deviation from the mean. b , Number of proteins associated
( P < 1.5 × 10 −11 ) with
each sentinel variant across the genome.

Circle shows enrichment for DNase I hypersensitive sites
(‘hotspots’) for each of 55 tissues (183 cell types) available
from the ENCODE and Roadmap Epigenomics projects, with tissues or cell types
clustered and coloured by anatomical grouping. Some tissues have multiple
values due to availability of multiple cell types or multiple tests per cell
type. Radial lines show fold-enrichment, while dots around the inside edge
of the circle denote statistically significant enrichment at a
Bonferroni-corrected significant threshold P < 5
× 10 −5 . Enrichment testing performed using GARFIELD
(which tests enrichment against permuted sets of variants matched for MAF,
distance to TSS and LD). pQTL data from n = 3,301
individuals.

See Methods . GbA,
guilt-by-association; KEGG, Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes; OMIM,
Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man; STRINGdb, STRING database.

These experiments were repeated three times independently with
similar results. a , SOMAmer pulldowns with purified PR3, A1AT,
and PR3–A1AT complex. SOMAmer PRTN3.3514.49.2 enriched the
PR3–A1AT complex to a much greater degree than free PR3. Conversely,
SOMAmer PRTN3.13720.95.3 enriched free PR3 to a greater degree than the
PR3–A1AT complex. b , Solution affinity of
PRTN3.3514.49.2 and PRTN3.13720.95.3 for PR3, A1AT, and the PR3–A1AT
complex. SOMAmer PRTN3.3514.49.2 has a higher affinity for the
PR3–A1AT complex than for free PR3. SOMAmer PRTN3.13720.95.3, on the
other hand, has a higher affinity for free PR3 than SOMAmer PRTN3.3514.49.2. c , Competitive binding of SOMAmers PRTN3.13720.95.3 and
PRTN3.3514.49.2 to PR3. A limiting amount of radiolabelled PRTN3.13720.95.3
was incubated with 1 nM proteinase-3 and a titration of either cold
PRTN3.13720.95.3 or cold PRTN3.3514.49.2.

a , Compartment distribution with annotations of all
proteins in the Human Protein Atlas for comparison. b , GO
molecular functions.

## Supplementary Material
Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-018-0175-2 .