# Title
Targeted complement inhibition at synapses prevents microglial
synaptic engulfment and synapse loss in demyelinating disease

# Abstract
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a demyelinating, autoimmune disease of the
central nervous system. While work has focused on myelin and axon loss in MS,
less is known about mechanisms underlying synaptic changes. Using postmortem
human MS tissue, a preclinical nonhuman primate model of MS, and two rodent
models of demyelinating disease, we investigated synapse changes in the visual
system. Similar to other neurodegenerative diseases, microglial synaptic
engulfment and profound synapse loss were observed. In mice, synapse loss
occurred independently of local demyelination and neuronal degeneration, but
coincided with gliosis and increased complement component C3, but not C1q, at
synapses. Viral overexpression of the complement inhibitor Crry at C3-bound
synapses decreased microglial engulfment of synapses and protected visual
function. These results indicate that microglia eliminate synapses through the
alternative complement cascade in demyelinating disease and identify a strategy
to prevent synapse loss that may be broadly applicable to other
neurodegenerative diseases.

## Introduction
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a neurological disease of the central nervous
system (CNS) affecting more than 2 million people worldwide (2019). The disease is
typically characterized by recurrent episodes of inflammatory demyelination with a
relapsing-remitting course, which can be accompanied by neurodegeneration ( Reich et al., 2018 , Amato et al., 2010 ). A subset of patients initially
present with or develop a progressive, chronic neurodegenerative disease with
significant synapse loss and CNS atrophy, termed progressive MS ( Mahad et al., 2015 ). Current FDA and EMA-approved
disease-modifying therapies, which inhibit peripheral immune attack of the CNS in
MS, are increasingly effective at reducing episodes of inflammatory demyelination
and neurological disability ( Mahad et al.,
2015 , Weideman et al., 2017 ).
However, the neurodegenerative process, particularly for patients with progressive
MS, has proven more challenging to decelerate ( Ciotti and Cross, 2018 ). Similar to other neurodegenerative diseases,
there is no clear mechanistic understanding of why some patients develop profound
degeneration and disability. Therefore, studying neurodegeneration in MS may offer
an opportunity to capture early phases of the degenerative process, which may be
broadly applicable to other CNS diseases and could lead to therapeutic strategies to
meet an urgent clinical need.

Synapse loss is an early and likely key feature underlying circuit
dysfunction in many neurodegenerative diseases, including Alzheimer’s disease
and other related dementias ( Selkoe et al.,
2008 , Mucke and Selkoe, 2012 , Selkoe, 2002 , Milnerwood and Raymond, 2010 , Yoshiyama et al., 2007 , Coleman et al., 2004 , Forner et al.,
2017 , Tyebji and Hannan, 2017 , Henstridge et al., 2016 ). However,
compared to other diseases, far less is known regarding how synaptic connections are
affected in MS. The vast majority of research aimed at treating neurodegenerative
aspects of MS focus on mechanisms of de- and remyelination, as well as axon de- and
regeneration ( Lassmann, 2018 , Lassmann, 2010 , Mahad et
al., 2015 , Dutta and Trapp, 2011 , Reich et al., 2018 ). From the few studies
assessing synaptic changes in postmortem MS tissue, synapse loss is observed in the
hippocampus and normal appearing gray matter in the cortex ( Dutta et al., 2011 , Jurgens et al., 2016 ). Similar results are found in rodent models of
demyelinating disease. For example, in a cuprizone model of demyelination, a
significant decrease in excitatory synapses is observed in the visual thalamus
concomitant with reactive gliosis and subcortical demyelination ( Araujo et al., 2017 ). In another study, experimental
autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE)-induced demyelination in mice results in a
~28% decrease in PSD-95-positive postsynaptic densities in the hippocampus,
which is observed in the absence of hippocampal demyelination, but in the presence
of reactive, phagocytic microglia ( Bellizzi et al.,
2016 ). A common feature in all these studies is reactive gliosis,
including pronounced increases in inflammatory microglia, a resident CNS macrophage
( Lassmann, 2018 , Lassmann, 2010 , Mahad et
al., 2015 , Voet et al., 2018 ).
However, it remains unclear if and how these inflammatory glial cells could modulate
synaptic connectivity in demyelinating disease.

Microglia have recently been identified as key regulators of synaptic
connectivity in the healthy and diseased brain. During development, microglia
regulate synaptic pruning by engulfing and removing a subset of synapses that
initially form in excess. One key mechanism is classical complement
cascade-dependent phagocytic signaling ( Stevens et
al., 2007 , Schafer et al., 2012 ).
In the peripheral immune system, components of the classical complement cascade, C1q
and C3, bind the surface of invading pathogens, cellular debris, etc., leading to
clearance by professional phagocytes that express complement receptors ( Carroll, 1998 , Morgan and Kavanagh, 2018 , Lambris and
Tsokos, 1986 , Reis et al., 2019 ).
Similarly, in the developing rodent visual thalamus, C1q and C3 localize to synapses
( Stevens et al., 2007 ). Microglia
expressing complement receptor 3 (CR3), a C3 receptor, then engulf these
complement-associated synapses. Mice deficient in either CR3 expressed by microglia,
C3, or C1q have a ~50% decrease in their ability to engulf and remove
synapses ( Schafer et al., 2012 , Bialas and Stevens, 2013 ). Classical complement
cascade-mediated phagocytic signaling is also aberrantly upregulated in mouse models
of Alzheimer’s disease, frontotemporal dementia, and West Nile Virus
infection, leading to synapse loss ( Hong et al.,
2016a , Vasek et al., 2016 , Lui et al., 2016 ). In MS patients, complement
proteins are elevated systemically and in the CNS ( Aeinehband et al., 2015 , Ingram et al.,
2012 , Ingram et al., 2009 , Watkins et al., 2016 ), and recent work suggests
that C1q and C3 colocalize with synaptic proteins in postmortem MS brains ( Michailidou et al., 2015 ). However, it remains
elusive if complement and/or microglia are necessary for synaptic changes in MS.

In the current study, we use the retinogeniculate system to study synaptic
changes in demyelinating disease. The retinogeniculate system is comprised of
retinal ganglion cells (RGCs), which are neurons in the retina that extend their
axons via the optic nerve and tract and synapse onto relay neurons within the
lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) of the thalamus. This circuit was chosen because
even subtle synaptic changes are readily detected by immunohistochemical methods
( Schafer et al., 2016 , Schafer et al., 2012 , Hong et al., 2014 ). In addition, the anterior visual pathway is commonly
affected in MS with upwards of 50% of patients experiencing inflammation of the
optic nerve (i.e. optic neuritis) and prolonged visual dysfunction ( Toosy et al., 2014 , Reich
et al., 2018 ). Using postmortem human MS tissue, a preclinical nonhuman
primate model of MS, and two different rodent models of demyelinating disease, we
investigated early synapse changes in the retinogeniculate system. Profound synapse
loss and engulfment of synaptic material by microglia, but not astrocytes, were
detected in the LGN from human MS tissue and in all MS-relevant animal models. In
rodents and non-human primates, synapse loss in demyelinating disease occurred
independent of neuronal cell death or axon degeneration and, in some cases, prior to
significant demyelination. In all species, synapse loss occurred concomitant with
reactive gliosis. To identify a molecular mechanism underlying this synapse loss, we
focused on the complement cascade and provide evidence for activation of the
alternative, but not the classical, complement cascade at synapses in demyelinating
disease. We then used an adeno-associated viral (AAV) approach to overexpress the C3
inhibitor Crry at sites of synaptic C3 activation in the retinogeniculate circuit
and demonstrated robust protection from synapse engulfment by microglia and synapse
loss. The rescue of structural synapses with this AAV approach was specific to the
retinogeniculate circuit and restored function as assessed by visual acuity.
Together, our data provide evidence that local inflammatory microglia and the
alternative complement cascade mediate synapse loss and functional decline in
demyelinating disease. With our data demonstrating that targeted inhibition of
activated C3 protects synapses, we further uncover a strategy to prevent synapse
loss at specific synapses and preserve circuit function during
neurodegeneration.

## Results
To first interrogate retinogeniculate synaptic changes that are
clinically relevant to MS, we assessed synaptic connectivity in postmortem LGN
from MS and control patients without neurological disease ( Table S1 and Fig. S1A - F ). Using anti-vesicular glutamate
transporter 2 (VGluT2) immunostaining, a marker specific to retinogeniculate
presynaptic inputs, and confocal imaging, we observed a significant decrease in
retinogeniculate presynaptic terminals within the LGN of MS patients compared to
controls ( Fig. 1A ). Colabeling with the
microglia/macrophage marker Iba1 and 3D-surface rendering further revealed that
significant amounts of VgluT2 + -terminals were engulfed within
Iba1 + -cells with morphological characteristics of microglia vs.
peripheral macrophages ( Fig. 1B ). These
results are consistent with previous work showing significant degeneration of
the thalamus and deep gray matter early in the disease course of MS, which
accurately predicts subsequent disease severity ( Eshaghi et al., 2018 , Zivadinov et
al., 2013 ). This is also in line with studies showing decreases in
presynaptic inputs in the hippocampus and cortex of postmortem MS tissue ( Dutta et al., 2011 , Jurgens et al., 2016 ) and studies demonstrating that
microglia engulf and eliminate synaptic components in other models of
neurodegenerative disease ( Hong et al.,
2016a , Paolicelli et al.,
2017 , Lui et al., 2016 , Vasek et al., 2016 ).

We next sought to corroborate these findings in a preclinical nonhuman
primate model of MS, experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) in common
marmosets induced by immunization with human white matter homogenate ( Lee et al., 2018 ). This model is
particularly powerful as it has many of the pathological features present in
human MS ( Absinta et al., 2016 ). Similar
to MS patient LGN, we found a ~2-fold reduction in the density of
retinogeniculate terminals and an increased localization of VgluT2 within
Iba1 + -cells ( Fig. 1C , D ) in the LGN from animals that developed EAE
with demyelinating lesions in the optic nerve and tract ( Table S2 and S1G - K ). This contrasts with either EAE
or non-EAE animals with no detectable lesions in the optic nerve and tract
( Table S2 ), which
were used as controls. Many of the engulfed VGluT2 + -retinogeniculate
terminals were detected within microglial phagocytic cups, which were not
present in Iba1 + -cells from control animals ( Fig. 1D ). To determine if loss of presynaptic inputs
and engulfment by microglia is specific to retinogeniculate terminals or if
synaptic connectivity within the LGN is affected more broadly, we assessed the
density of corticothalamic inputs by immunostaining against VGluT1 in marmosets.
Like retinogeniculate terminals, we also found a significant decrease in the
density of VGluT1 + -corticothalamic inputs in the LGN and detected
significant amounts of VGluT1 within Iba1 + -cells in marmosets with
lesions in the optic nerve and tract following EAE ( Fig. 1E , F ). These
data provide evidence that reactive microglia engulf and eliminate presynaptic
inputs within the retinogeniculate circuit in demyelinating disease.

Retinogeniculate synapse loss in human and marmoset raised the following
questions: 1) Is synapse loss a separable feature of disease or secondary to
other pathologies? and 2) What mechanism underlies synapse loss? We turned to
mouse models to gain a deeper mechanistic understanding and address these
questions. We assessed two distinct mouse models: a model of inflammatory
demyelination and a model of primary demyelination. Inflammatory demyelination
was induced using the MOG 35–55 C57Bl6/J mouse EAE model ( Crocker et al., 2006 ). We assessed synapse
density at the onset of clinical symptoms (average scores: 1.35±0.35 at
10.8±0.4 days-post induction; Fig.
2A ) and made all comparisons to Complete Freund’s Adjuvant
(CFA)-treated controls. The other model we tested was the Plp1-CreER T ;ROSA26-EGFP-DTA (diphtheria toxin A (DTA)) mouse model of primary demyelination ( Traka et al., 2010 , Traka et al., 2016 ). In this model, 5–7-week-old DTA and
control (ROSA26-EGFP-DTA) mice receive tamoxifen injections. In DTA mice, this
induces the expression of diphtheria toxin A in mature oligodendrocytes, which
results in demyelination within several weeks post-injection ( Fig. 2D ). For consistency, we performed the bulk of
our analyses in male mice. Also, in humans, while males are less prone to MS
compared to females, they tend to develop more aggressive forms of the disease
with more disability ( Bove et al., 2012 , Gholipour et al., 2011 , Confavreux et al., 2000 ). Therefore,
analysis of males is highly relevant for studying neurodegeneration related to
MS.

Like human and marmoset data ( Fig.
1 ), we detected a significant, >50% reduction in
VGluT2 + - and VGluT1 + -presynaptic inputs within the LGN
at earlier stages of mouse EAE ( Fig.
2B , C ) and during demyelination
at 35 days post-injection (35 dpi) in the DTA model ( Fig. 2E , F ). This
was accompanied by a pronounced reduction in the density of structural synapses
(colocalized presynaptic VGluT2 or VGluT1 with postsynaptic PSD-95 or Homer1).
However, this synapse loss was mainly attributed to a presynaptic effect in both
models, as the densities of postsynaptic PSD-95 and Homer1 were relatively
unaltered ( Fig. 2Bi , Ci , Ei , Fi ). These data are consistent with
previously published work demonstrating preferential loss of presynaptic
elements in the retinogeniculate system ( Schafer
et al., 2012 , Schafer et al.,
2016 ). Note, in EAE, similar synapse loss was observed in female mice
( Fig. S4A , C ). However, these
effects were less robust compared to male mice, which could be one explanation
underlying the more aggressive disease in human male MS patients. Taken
together, these results are consistent with retinogeniculate synapse loss as a
common feature in human MS and across nonhuman primate and multiple mouse models
of disease.

In the human MS cases, patients have had protracted disease with
demyelination ( Fig.
S1A , B ) and
many patients had a history of optic neuritis ( Table S1 ). Likewise, in the
marmoset EAE and mouse DTA models, there were indications of demyelination in
the LGN and optic tract ( Table
S2 ; Figs.
S1G , H and S5A , B ). Although there were some signs
of apoptotic cells and mild axonal degeneration in the human LGN ( Fig. S1C - F ), we found no indications of
neuron or axonal loss in nonhuman primate and DTA mouse models ( Figs. S1I - K and S5C - G ). These data raise the
possibility that synaptic changes could be a separable, independent event in the
degenerative process. This idea is supported by human imaging studies where
thalamic degeneration is an accurate predictor of subsequent MS-related
disability ( Eshaghi et al., 2018 , Zivadinov et al., 2013 ). To further test
this possibility, we assessed demyelination, neuron cell loss, and axon
degeneration in the mouse EAE model at the onset of clinical symptoms. While we
observed significant increases in peripheral immune cells ( Fig. S2A , B ), we detected no significant
changes in the myelin sheath in the retinogeniculate circuit at early stages of
EAE when we detect synapse loss (average clinical scores: 1.35±0.35; Figs. 3A - C and S3A - F ).
These analyses included electron microscopy to measure g-ratios and myelin
thickness in the optic nerve, assessment of nodes of Ranvier and paranodal
junctions in the optic nerve by immunofluorescence microscopy ( Wolswijk and Balesar, 2003 , Howell et al., 2006 ), and assessment of
immunofluorescence intensity for myelin proteins (MOG, MBP, and MAG) in the
optic tract, the LGN, and optic nerve in EAE compared to CFA-controls. Similar
to marmoset EAE and DTA models, there were also no significant changes in the
density of NeuN + -neurons or neurofilament + -axons and no
significant increases in the number of cleaved caspase 3 + -apoptotic
cells or amyloid precursor protein (APP) accumulations in axons within the
retinogeniculate circuit at these early phases of mouse EAE ( Figs. 3D - G ; S3G - K ). These results demonstrate that
synapse loss can occur prior to neuronal degeneration in multiple models and, in
the case of mouse EAE, prior to myelin pathology but in the presence of local
inflammation.

Given our initial data demonstrating microglial engulfment of synapses
in human MS and marmoset EAE LGN, we hypothesized that reactive glia were
responsible for the loss of synapses in demyelinating disease. Indeed, a common
pathological feature across models was reactive gliosis ( Figs. S2C - E and S5J - M ) and the presence of infiltrating
peripheral immune cells, albeit less severe in the DTA model ( Fig. S2A , B and S5H , I ). The reactive gliosis in mouse
models included microglia with a neurodegenerative phenotype ( Krasemann et al., 2017 , Keren-Shaul et al., 2017 ), indicated by reduced
P2RY12, a marker of homeostatic microglia, and increased Clec7a, a
neurodegeneration-associated marker. To further examine whether local
inflammatory gliosis was a contributing factor to early synapse loss, we tested
whether reactive microglia engulfed presynaptic terminals in the mouse EAE and
DTA models. We labeled microglia with anti-P2RY12, which distinguishes resident
microglia from peripheral infiltrating macrophages ( Butovsky et al., 2014 , Jordao et al., 2019 ), and microglial lysosomes with
anti-CD68 to assess engulfed presynaptic terminals using confocal imaging and
3D-surface rendering. Like data from humans and marmosets ( Fig. 1 ), we found a ~10-fold increase in the
engulfment of VGluT2 + - and VGluT1 + -presynaptic inputs
within microglial lysosomes in the LGN in male EAE and DTA mice ( Fig. 4A , B , D , E )
compared to controls. Note, while overall P2RY12 was reduced, it was still
detectable allowing us to distinguish microglia from peripheral myeloid cells.
Synaptic engulfment by microglia was also detected in female EAE mice, but,
similar to synapse loss, was less pronounced compared to males ( Fig S4B , D ). There was no evidence for
engulfment of postsynaptic compartments in EAE mice ( Fig. 4C ). This latter finding is in line with other
reports showing that microglia predominantly engulf presynaptic inputs ( Schafer et al., 2012 , Schafer et al., 2014 , Weinhard et al., 2018 , Gunner et
al., 2019 ), and our findings that the density of postsynaptic
compartments were relatively unaltered in EAE and DTA mice ( Fig. 2 ).

In addition to microglia, astrocytes engulf synaptic material during
postnatal development of the visual system ( Chung et al., 2013 ). To test if reactive astrocytes similarly engulf
synaptic material in a demyelinating disease context, we stained astrocytes in
the LGN with an antibody against ALDH1L1 and assessed engulfment of VGluT2 into
LAMP2 + -lysosomes in the mouse EAE and DTA models. No engulfment
of VGluT2 was detected within astrocytes in either model ( Fig. 4F , G ). We
found similar effects in the marmoset EAE model ( Fig. 4H ). These data suggest that while astrocytes engulf synapses
during developmental synaptic pruning, reactive astrocytes are not contributing
to the engulfment of presynaptic terminals in demyelinating disease. This is
consistent with recent work demonstrating that reactive astrocytes are less
capable of phagocytosis ( Liddelow et al.,
2017 ). Together, these data demonstrate that reactive gliosis is a
common feature across demyelinating disease, which can occur prior to
significant demyelination in mouse EAE and in the absence of significant axonal
or neuronal degeneration in all animal models tested. Our data further suggest
that reactive microglia mediate synapse engulfment and elimination in
demyelinating disease.

Previous work in mice has shown that microglial engulfment and
elimination of synapses in development and in models of neurodegeneration is
mediated by the classical complement cascade ( Hong et al., 2016b ). In this cascade, the initiating molecule C1q
and downstream C3 localize to synapses, and microglia that express the receptor
for C3 (CR3) engulf and eliminate synapses ( Stevens et al., 2007 , Schafer et
al., 2012 ). These complement factors also increase in other CNS
regions in EAE and MS patient tissue ( Nataf et
al., 2000 , Ingram et al.,
2012 , Ingram et al., 2014 , Michailidou et al., 2017 , Michailidou et al., 2015 , Watkins et al., 2016 ), but it is unknown if
complement mediates synapse loss in these contexts. We first assessed C1q and C3
protein in the retinogeniculate system in mouse and marmoset EAE. This analysis
revealed a significant increase in C1q and C3 in the LGN in both species
following EAE ( Fig. 5 ). However, despite
increases in C1q throughout the LGN, it did not colocalize with presynaptic
terminals ( Figs. 5A , B , E , S4E ). In contrast,
complement factor C3 was colocalized with both presynaptic terminal markers and
enrichment at synaptic compartments ( Figs.
5C , D , F , S4F ). The same observations were made in the mouse DTA model ( Fig. S5N , O ). These data support a
complement-dependent model by which microglia engulf and eliminate synapses.
However, unlike developmental and other neurodegenerative disease contexts,
synapse loss in demyelinating disease may be independent of C1q localization to
synapses. Instead, our data support the involvement of the alternative
complement cascade, which bypasses C1q and works directly through
synapse-localized activated C3, to mediate synapse loss.

To test whether synapse-localized, activated C3 was inducing
microglia-mediated synapse engulfment and elimination, we took a gene therapy
approach. We used adeno-associated virus (AAV9) to overexpress the complement
inhibitor Crry, which restricts C3 activation and inhibits C3-mediated
opsonization ( Turnberg and Botto, 2003 , Molina, 2002 ) in the retinogeniculate
circuit ( Fig. 6A ). To gain further
specificity, we fused Crry to a domain of complement receptor 2 (CR2), which is
a receptor that binds activated C3. Following the sequence encoding the
Crry-CR2-fusion protein was an autocleavage site and an EGFP sequence, which we
used to identify transduced neurons and their projections. We termed this vector
AAV-Crry. The Crry-CR2 fusion protein is targeted by the CR2 domain to sites of
activated C3 deposition where Crry then inhibits further C3 activation ( Alawieh et al., 2015 , Atkinson et al., 2005 , Atkinson et al., 2006 , Qiao et al.,
2006 , Alawieh and Tomlinson,
2016 ). For a control vector, we used an EGFP encoding construct
(AAV-EGFP). AAV9 viral vectors were then generated and validated in cultured
neuro-2a (N2a) cells. One week after viral transduction, western blot analysis
revealed robust expression of Crry and EGFP in transduced N2a cells ( Fig. 6B ). Following initial validation,
AAV-Crry or AAV-EGFPs were injected into the vitreous of both eyes of separate
cohorts of four-week-old WT mice to transduce retinal ganglion cells (RGCs).
Twenty-eight days following AAV delivery, EAE was induced in these mice ( Fig. 6C ). Mice were then analyzed at the
onset of clinical symptoms (average: AAV-Crry: 1.4±0.3; AAV-EGFP
1.5±0.3), which was typically observed around day 11 post-immunization
(AAV-Crry: 11.2±0.6; AAV-EGFP: 11.4±0.4). Another cohort of mice
was assessed at peak disease (average: AAV-Crry: 3±0.45; AAV-EGFP:
2.66±0.71), which was typically observed around day 18
post-immunization.

Beginning with mice at the onset of EAE, we first determined the degree
of EGFP colocalization with VGluT2 + -retinogeniculate terminals in the
LGN and found ~45% of VGluT2 + - retinogeniculate terminals in
the LGN colocalized with EGFP after injection of both AAVs ( Fig. 6D ). We then immunostained for Crry protein and
identified that Crry was highly enriched at presynaptic terminals within the LGN
of AAV-Crry injected mice ( Fig. 6E , F ), precisely where we identified enrichment
of C3 ( Fig. 5 ). These data demonstrate
successful CR2-mediated Crry targeting to retinogeniculate synapses bound by
activated C3. In contrast, AAV-EGFP injected mice showed only diffuse Crry
immunoreactivity with no concentration on or around presynaptic inputs in the
LGN following EAE. Regardless of AAV treatment, mice showed comparable reactive
gliosis, infiltration of peripheral immune cells, and C1q upregulation ( Figs. 6H , and 7E - J ). These data suggest that
retinogeniculate overexpression of Crry did not have global effects on
inflammation. We next asked if Crry overexpression reduced deposition of C3 at
the onset of EAE. While we found modest reductions in total C3 throughout the
LGN in EAE AAV-Crry treated mice, there was a pronounced decrease in the
colocalization of C3 with VGluT2 + -retinogeniculate terminals in
AAV-Crry treated EAE mice at the onset of disease compared to AAV-EGFP controls
( Fig. 6G ). C3 colocalization with
VGluT1 + -corticothalamic inputs was also reduced, but this
decrease was less pronounced compared to VGluT2 + -terminals. These
data demonstrate that AAV-Crry is highly localized to synapses within the
retinogeniculate circuit and it can block C3 localization at synapses during
EAE.

Following validation that Crry is localized to retinogeniculate
presynaptic terminals where it inhibits C3 localization at synapses without more
global effects on inflammation and reactive gliosis, we next assessed
microglia-mediated synapse engulfment. Consistent with microglia-eliminating
synapses via C3-mediated engulfment, there was a significant reduction in
VGluT2 + - and VGluT1 + -terminals engulfed within
microglial lysosomes of AAV-Crry-treated mice compared to AAV-EGFP controls
( Fig. 7K , L ). We then measured synapse loss and identified a significant
attenuation of VGluT2 + - and VGluT1 + -synapse loss at EAE
onset ( Fig. 7M , N ). We also assessed synapse engulfment and loss of
presynaptic terminals in layer IV of the somatosensory cortex, a brain region
without direct inputs from RGCs or the LGN and identified that AAV-Crry did not
protect these synapses ( Fig.
S7A , B ).
These data suggest that the protective effects of AAV-mediated Crry expression
are circuit-specific. To assess long-term effects of AAV-Crry, we also assessed
synapses at peak disease ± AAV-Crry in a separate cohort of EAE mice
( Fig. S6A ). First,
in control AAV-EGFP mice, synapse loss was still observed, and mild but
significant demyelination, neuron loss, and axon degeneration became apparent in
the retinogeniculate circuit at peak EAE ( Fig. S6B - D ). However, in AAV-Crry mice,
synapse loss was still protected at peak EAE, but demyelination, myelin
engulfment by microglia, axon/neuron loss, gliosis, and peripheral immune cell
infiltration were unaffected ( Figs. S6B - K and S7C ). These data
further support that synapse loss is a separable feature of the degenerative
process in demyelinating disease.

Finally, to ask if protection of synapse loss in the retinogeniculate
circuit has consequences for visual function, we assessed visual acuity ( Prusky et al., 2004 ) in mice before
induction of EAE and either at the onset of EAE or at peak disease by optomotor
testing ± AAV transduction ( Figs.
7O , S6L ). We
first found that intravitreal injection of AAVs had no significant effect on
visual acuity performance prior to EAE induction. We then observed a significant
decline in visual acuity following EAE induction in all mice, except the
AAV-Crry treated cohorts. AAV-Crry treatment significantly blocked loss of
visual acuity in mice at both the onset and peak of EAE. These data demonstrate
that inhibition of C3 specifically at synapses protects circuit-specific
structure and function. This represents a gene therapy approach to inhibiting
synapse loss, which may be broadly applicable to many neurodegenerative diseases
where complement-dependent synapse loss has been implicated.

## Discussion
In postmortem human tissue, a preclinical nonhuman primate model of MS, and
two rodent models of demyelinating disease we identified microglial engulfment of
presynaptic inputs and synapse loss in a MS-relevant visual circuit, the
retinogeniculate circuit. We further provide evidence that this process can occur
independent of axon degeneration and neuronal cell loss and, in the case of mouse
EAE, in the absence of significant demyelination. Instead, synapse engulfment and
loss in the visual thalamus occurred concomitant with local reactive gliosis and in
the presence of synapse-enriched C3, but not synapse-associated C1q. Finally,
overexpressing Crry, an inhibitor of C3, in the retinogeniculate circuit, reduced
synaptic C3, inhibited microglial synapse engulfment, and attenuated synapse loss
specifically within the LGN with no significant effect on other pathologies.
Together, these data support a model by which reactive microglia mediate synapse
loss through the alternative complement cascade in demyelinating disease.

Our data showing that synapse engulfment and loss was in some cases
independent of and/or prior to other MS-relevant pathologies is in line with
previous work suggesting that gray matter degeneration in MS can at least partially
occur independent of demyelination ( Mandolesi et
al., 2015 ). Also, there is evidence that, even with the generation of new
FDA-approved MS therapies, there is ‘silent progression’ of the
disease where a symptom-free patient at a 2 year follow-up still develops
significant disability by the 10 th year ( Cree et al., 2019 ). Local gliosis and microglia-mediated synapse
elimination may be an underlying feature of this ‘silent progression’
and an early event in the progressive course of neurodegeneration. Consistent with
this idea, prior work implicates the thalamus as one of the earliest targets of
degeneration in MS, and thalamic degeneration is an accurate predictor of subsequent
MS-related disability ( Eshaghi et al., 2018 , Zivadinov et al., 2013 ). Work in mouse
models of other neurodegenerative diseases have also shown similar early synapse
loss when reactive microglia are also present ( Hong
et al., 2016a , Paolicelli et al.,
2017 , Wishart et al., 2006 , Yoshiyama et al., 2007 ). In the current study,
we further showed that these early synaptic changes in demyelinating disease occur
in both males and females, but males trended towards more profound loss of synapses.
This is consistent with the literature demonstrating that, while MS is less
frequent, males tend to have more aggressive disease with more disability compared
to females ( Bove et al., 2012 , Gholipour et al., 2011 , Confavreux et al., 2000 ). A further assessment of
potential sex differences in severity of synapse loss and underlying mechanisms will
be important going forward.

A question arising from our work relates to how inflammatory reactive
microgliosis and synapse loss are initiated. One possibility is that there are more
subtle changes in the myelin sheath and/or neural activity, which are responsible
for triggering microglia-mediated synapse loss in demyelinating disease. Indeed,
recent work has suggested that mice mutant for myelin genes with no detectable gross
changes in the myelin sheath have low grade inflammation and microgliosis ( Janova et al., 2018 ). Another likely mechanism
for initiation of microglia-mediated synapse loss is through blood brain barrier
breakdown and peripheral immune cell infiltration, which occurred in EAE and to a
lesser extent in the DTA model. This potential mechanism is supported by a recent
study showing that β-synuclein-specific T-cells, which are also present in
human MS cases, can induce local gliosis and cortical gray matter degeneration in
mice ( Lodygin et al., 2019 ). Similarly, T
cells were shown to stimulate microglia-mediated synapse elimination in a mouse
model of West Nile Virus infection and neuron loss in Zika infected mice ( Garber et al., 2019 ). In addition to T cells,
leakage of fibrinogen from the vasculature following blood brain barrier breakdown
has also been shown to regulate local microgliosis and axon degeneration in the
spinal cord in mouse EAE and microglia-mediated dendritic spinal loss in the cortex
in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease ( Davalos et al., 2012 , Merlini et al.,
2019 , Szalai et al., 2007 ). The
relative contribution of blood brain barrier breakdown to initiation of
complement-mediated synapse elimination by microglia in MS-relevant disease is a key
question.

Another important consideration is the potential role of astrocytes and
astrocyte-microglia crosstalk in the initiation of complement-mediated synapse
engulfment and elimination. In development, similar to microglia, astrocytes engulf
synaptic material and regulate synaptic architecture ( Chung et al., 2013 ). Astrocytes also become phagocytic
and engulf increased amounts of synaptic material following stroke-induced brain
ischemia and other disease-relevant conditions ( Morizawa et al., 2017 , Bellesi et al.,
2017 , Chung et al., 2016 ). In
contrast, we showed that synapse engulfment is mediated by microglia, but not
astrocytes. Our data are most consistent with recent work showing that reactive,
neurotoxic astrocytes have decreased phagocytic capacity ( Liddelow et al., 2017 ). However, this does not rule out
the possibility that local astrogliosis can influence microglia-mediated synapse
elimination in other ways. For example, astrocytes also promote microglial synaptic
engulfment in the developing brain through IL-33 signaling ( Vainchtein et al., 2018 ). In other models of
neurodegeneration, microglia induce astrocytes to transition to a more reactive
phenotype, including induction of astrocytic C3 ( Liddelow et al., 2017 ). Understanding how these reactive astrocytes
then, in turn, influence microglia-mediated synapse elimination will be an important
direction to explore in the future.

A key finding in our study is the identification of a role for C3 and the
alternative vs. the classical complement cascade in retinogeniculate synapse
elimination during inflammatory demyelinating disease. In contrast, the classical
complement cascade molecules C1q and C3 localize to synapses and block microglial
synapse engulfment and synapse elimination during developmental synaptic pruning
( Schafer et al., 2012 , Stevens et al., 2007 , Bialas and Stevens, 2013 ) and in mouse models of Alzheimer’s
disease, frontotemporal dementia and West Nile Virus infection ( Hong et al., 2016a , Vasek
et al., 2016 , Lui et al., 2016 , Shi et al., 2017 ). Another recent study
indicates that C1q and C3 increase in MS and may colocalize with synaptic proteins
in postmortem MS brains ( Michailidou et al.,
2015 ). Our data indicated a similar increase in C1q, but no C1q
deposition at retinogeniculate synapses in multiple MS-relevant animal models.
Instead, we observed localization of C3 to synapses. These data suggest that synapse
elimination occurs through the alternative, versus the C1q-dependent classical,
complement cascade in demyelinating disease. This is consistent with earlier work in
EAE suggesting that the alternative complement pathway predominates and that
blocking this pathway globally prevents disease progression ( Nataf et al., 2000 ). Similarly, clinical studies have
shown increases in C3 in the plasma and CSF of MS patients, which correlates with
disease severity and clinical disability ( Ingram et
al., 2012 , Ingram et al., 2014 , Tatomir et al., 2017 ) ( Ingram et al., 2012 , Aeinehband et al., 2015 ). However, it is still important to consider the
contribution of C1q and perhaps driving inflammatory reactive gliosis. Related, the
microglial receptor regulating engulfment of C3-opsonized synapses in our models
remains to be identified. Mice deficient in complement receptor 3 (CR3) display an
~50% block of microglial synaptic engulfment during developmental synaptic
pruning and in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease ( Hong et al., 2016a , Schafer et al., 2012 ). Complement receptor 3a (C3aR), but not CR3,
regulates microglial synapse engulfment in a West Nile Virus-induced model of
synapse loss and cognitive impairment ( Vasek et al.,
2016 ). However, assessing synapse loss CR3 or C3aR-deficient mice is
challenging, as both have attenuated EAE due to a dampened peripheral inflammatory
response ( Boos et al., 2004 , Bullard et al., 2005 ). Therefore, the identification of
microglial receptors involved in synapse engulfment in demyelinating disease
requires new genetic tool development to more specifically manipulate these
receptors in microglia versus other myeloid lineage cells.

Finally, using AAV-mediated in vivo gene delivery of Crry
in mouse EAE, we showed that selective inhibition of activated C3 at presynaptic
boutons protected structural synapses and visual function. This was achieved by
overexpressing Crry fused to a domain of CR2 that only binds activated C3 in RGCs,
resulting in enrichment of Crry protein in retinogeniculate presynaptic terminals
following EAE. Supporting this as a possible therapeutic strategy, AAV-mediated
delivery of Crry decreases C3 activation in models of macular degeneration and
ischemic brain injury ( Atkinson et al., 2005 , Huang et al., 2008 , Marshall et al., 2014 , Alawieh et al., 2015 , Atkinson et al.,
2006 ). Also, systemic, peripheral administration of a Crry-CR2 encoding
AAV attenuates EAE ( Hu et al., 2012 ), which
was attributed to the targeting of peripheral immune cells and restricting epitope
spreading. This contrasts with our study where the AAV was delivered locally to the
eye, resulting in specific reduction in C3 and protection of synapses in the
retinogeniculate circuit with no significant attenuation of peripheral immune
infiltration, increased C1q, or reactive gliosis. Further, at later time points
during peak EAE, synapses were still protected but the mild demyelination and axon
degeneration in the retinogeniculate circuit in EAE were not. These data further
support that synapse loss is an early pathology and is most consistent with Crry-AAV
specifically inhibiting C3 at synapses in the LGN as compared to an indirect effect
following decreases in, for example, reactive microgliosis. We also observed some,
albeit milder, protection of VGluT1 + -corticothalamic synapses in the LGN,
in addition to protection of VGluT2 + -retinogeniculate synapses. The Crry
protein in our paradigm was not full length. Therefore, it is possible that Crry at
retinogeniculate synapses was being released locally to protect
VGluT1 + -synapses from elimination or that Crry modulated C3 production by
astrocytes or microglial phagocytic capacity. In either case, these results
demonstrate that Crry-mediated protection of synapses could be a viable therapeutic
strategy to protect against synapse loss during neurodegeneration. While in some
cases synapse loss may be an endogenous protective mechanism to dampen activity and
inhibit excitotoxicity, synapse loss may become dysregulated over the course of
disease leading to aberrant elimination of other ‘innocent bystander’
synapses. This gives further support to developing a circuit-specific approach, such
as AAV, to therapeutically target synapse loss in neurodegenerative disease.

## STAR Methods
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be
directed to and will be fulfilled by the Lead Contact, Dorothy Schafer
( dorothy.schafer@umassmed.edu ). AAV-Crry was produced in our
laboratory and is available upon request to the lead contact with a completed
Materials Transfer Agreement.

Male and female wildtype C57Bl/6J mice (stock #000664) were obtained
from Jackson Laboratories (Bar Harbor, ME). Male Plp1-CreER T ;ROSA26-EGFP-DTA (DTA) and ROSA26-EGFP-DTA (DTA-ctrl.) littermates were
generated by breeding hemizygous Plp1-CreER T mice with ROSA26-EGFP-DTA homozygous mice ( Traka et al., 2010 , Traka et al., 2016 ). 5–8-week-old
mice and their respective littermate controls were used for all
mouse experiments. 12 adult common marmosets (Callithrix
jacchus), eight females and four males, were selected from the
NINDS colony. All animal experiments were performed in accordance with
Animal Care and Use Committees (IACUC) and under NIH guidelines for proper
animal welfare.

Collection of human postmortem brain tissue was performed after
obtaining informed consent for collection. Tissue collection followed
protocols approved by NIH Institutional Review Board. Samples analyzed in
the current study were collected from 5 male and 5 female human subjects
with ages ranging from 59–84 and 58–78 years, respectively.
From these subjects, control samples were collected from 2 males and 3
females without diagnosed neurological disease, and MS samples were
collected from 3 male and 2 female patients with progressive MS. See Table S1 for further
details.

EAE was induced in marmosets by injecting human white matter
homogenate emulsified in complete Freund’s adjuvant (Difco
Laboratories, BD, Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA) ( Absinta et al., 2016 , Lee et
al., 2018 ). For EAE induction, intradermal injections were
divided over four areas around the inguinal and axillary lymph nodes. To
conserve animals, marmoset tissue used in this study was drawn from prior
studies, some of which were designed to examine the effects of intranasal
inoculation of human herpesvirus (HHV)-6 on EAE development. Therefore, a
subset of marmosets (EAE and non-EAE) used in our study also received either
HHV6 serotype A derived from SUP-T1 cells, HHV6 serotype B derived from
HSB-2 cells, or were inoculated with uninfected control SUP-T1 cells.
Importantly, although the onset of EAE was accelerated with HHV6 treatment,
no pathological changes in or outside of lesions other than accumulation of
viral material were observed in the HHV6 studies ( Leibovitch et al., 2018 ). Marmoset demyelinating
lesions were monitored in vivo and ex vivo (i.e. postmortem dissected brain)
by MRI. The animals were subsequently divided into 2 groups. The
experimental group included EAE marmosets with clear demyelinating lesions
in the optic nerve and tract. The control group were either EAE or non-EAE
marmosets with no evidence of demyelinating lesions in the optic nerve or
tract.

As described previously ( Crocker et
al., 2006 ), experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) was
induced in 8-week-old male and female mice, by subcutaneous (s.c.)
administration of 200 μg of MOG 35–55 peptide
(AnaSpec Inc., AS-60130–10, Fremont, CA, USA) emulsified in complete
Freund’s Adjuvant (CFA, Sigma, F5881, Saint Louise, MO, USA)
containing 0.2 mg of Mycobacterium tuberculosis H37Ra
(Difco Laboratories, #231141 Detroit, MI, USA) into the flanks of both
hind-limbs. Control animals received s.c. injections lacking
MOG 35–55 peptide. At the time of immunization and 48h
later, mice further received intraperitoneal (i.p.) injections with 500 ng
of pertussis toxin (List Biologicals, #180, Deisenhofen, Germany). Weights
and clinical scores were recorded daily (score 0.5: distal tail limpness;
score 1: complete limp tail; score 1.5: limp tail and hindlimb weakness;
score 2: mild hindlimb paresis; score 2.5: unilateral hindlimb paralysis;
score 3: bilateral hindlimb paralysis, score 4: moribund). For the EAE
experiments presented in this study, mice were either analyzed at the onset
of EAE, when animals displayed moderate clinical scores (typically observed
between day 10–12 post immunization) or at peak disease when mice
displayed severe clinical scores (typically observed ~18 days post
induction). None of the CFA-treated control mice developed clinical
symptoms.

Male Plp1-CreER T ;ROSA26-EGFP-DTA mice 5–7-week-old were injected intraperitoneally with 0.8 mg of
4-hydroxytamoxifen (Sigma) per day for four consecutive days, as previously
described, to induce demyelination driven by genetic ablation of mature
oligodendrocytes ( Traka et al., 2010 , Traka et al., 2016 ).
Tamoxifen-injected ROSA26-EGFP-DTA littermates were used as control
mice.

At the indicated time points, mice were deeply anesthetized and
transcardially perfused with 0.1M phosphate buffer (PB) followed by 4%
paraformaldehyde (PFA)/0.1M PB. Brains, retinas, and optic nerves were
dissected, and brains and retinas were post-fixed at 4°C in PFA for
4h and 30 min, respectively. Brains and optic nerves were then equilibrated
in 30% sucrose/0.1M PB, and then embedded in a 1:1 mixture of 30%
sucrose/0.1M PB and O.C.T. compound (ThermoFisher Scientific Waltham, MA,
USA). Tissue was cryo-sectioned into 10 μm coronal brain sections and
longitudinal optic nerve sections. Sections and whole retinas were blocked
and permeabilized at room temperature for 1h in 10% normal goat serum/0.1M
PB containing 0.3% Triton-X 100 (all Sigma) followed by overnight incubation
with primary antibodies at room temperature. The following primary
monoclonal (mAb) and polyclonal (pAb) antibodies have been used: mouse mAb
α-ALDH1L1 (clone N103/39, Millipore, MABN495, 1:1000), mouse mAb
α-APP (clone 22C11, Millipore, MAB348, 1:200), rabbit mAb
α-C1q (clone 4.8, Abcam, ab182451, 1:100), rat mAb α-C3 (clone
11H-9, Abcam, ab11862, 1:500), rabbit pAb α-CASPR (provided by
Matthew N. Rasband, 1:100), rabbit mAb α-CD3 (clone SP7, Abcam,
ab16669, 1:100), mouse mAb α-CD8 (clone 8/114B, Thermo Fisher
Scientific, MA5–13473, 1:20), rat mAb α-CD45 (clone IBL-3/16,
BioRad, MCA1388, 1:100), mouse mAb α-CD68 (clone KP1, Abcam, ab955,
1:200), rat mAb α-CD68 (clone FA-11, AbD Serotec, MCA1957, 1:1000),
rat mAb α-Clec7a (InvivoGen, mabg-mdect, 1:200), rabbit pAb
α-Clec12a (LSBio, LS-C377776, 1:500), rabbit pAb α-cleaved
caspase-3 (Cell Signaling Technologies, #9661, 1:200), mouse mAb
α-Crry (clone TLD-1C11, Santa Cruz, sc-53530, 1:100), chicken pAb
α-EGFP (Abcam, ab13970, 1:500), mouse mAb α-FoxP3 (clone 206D,
BioLegend, 320102, 1:50), mouse mAb α-GFAP (clone G-A-5, Sigma,
G3893, 1:500), rabbit pAb α-Homer1 (Synaptic Systems, #160003,
1:1000), rabbit pAb α-Iba1 (Wako Chemicals, #019–19741,
1:500), rat mAb α-LAMP2 (clone GL2A7, Abcam, ab13524, 1:200), rat mAb
α-Ly6C (clone HK1.4, BioLegend, 128016, 1:300), mouse mAb
α-MAG (clone 513, Millipore, MAB1567, 1:100), rat mAb α-MBP
(clone 12, Millipore, MAB386, 1:500), mouse mAb α-MOG (clone
8–18C5, Millipore, MAB5680, 1:200), rabbit pAb α-Neurofilament
200 (Sigma, N4142, 1:1000), chicken pAb α-NeuN (Millipore, ABN91,
1:1000), rabbit pAb α-P2RY12 (AnaSpec, AS-55043A, 1:2000), rat mAb
α-P2RY12 (clone S16007D, BioLegend, 848002, 1:100), mouse mAb
α-PSD-95 (clone 6G6–1C9, Millipore, MAB1596, 1:100), guinea
pig pAb α-RBPMS (PhosphoSolutions, 1832-RBPMS, 1:500), rabbit pAb
α-βIV-spectrin (provided by Matthew N. Rasband, 1:100), guinea
pig pAb α-VGluT1 (Millipore, ab5905, 1:2000), and guinea pig pAb
α-VGluT2 (Millipore, ab2251, 1:2000). The following day, sections
were incubated with appropriate Alexa-fluorophore-conjugated secondary
antibodies (ThermoFisher Scientific) and mounted with vectashield containing
DAPI (Vector laboratories, Burlingame, CA, USA).

Human postmortem brain tissue was dissected and formalin-fixed at
autopsy and marmoset brains were collected within 1h of death and fixed in
4% paraformaldehyde. Once individual slabs containing the lateral geniculate
nucleus (LGN) of human and marmoset brains were identified, tissue was
embedded in paraffin and sliced into 10 μm thick slides. For
immunohistological stains on marmoset and human tissue, slices were
deparaffinized and rehydrated, and antigen-binding sites were retrieved by
heating for 1h in 10 mM citrate buffer, pH 6.0, with 0.05% Tween-20 in a
steam oven before staining. All subsequent steps followed the above
described protocol for staining of mouse tissue. If goat-derived primary
antibodies were used, blocking was performed with 10% donkey serum (Sigma).
Different from staining of mouse tissue (see below), rabbit pAb α-C1q
(Biologicals, NBP1–87492, 1:200) and mouse mAb α-C3d (clone
7C10, Abcam, ab17453, 1:50) were used to detect complement components,
chicken pAb α-MAP2 (EnCor Biotechnology, CPCA-MAP2, 1:1000) was used
to stain neurons, rabbit pAb α-VGluT1 (Millipore, abN1627) was used
to label presynaptic corticothalamic inputs and goat pAb α-Iba1
(Abcam, ab5076, 1:200) was used to visualize microglia/macrophages on human
and marmoset tissue.

Engulfment analysis was performed according to previously described
protocols ( Schafer et al., 2012 , Schafer et al., 2014 ). Briefly,
two sections from each sample containing the LGN in marmoset and human and
the dorsal LGN in mouse were immunostained and imaged on a Zeiss Observer
Spinning Disk Confocal microscope equipped with diode lasers (405 nm, 488
nm, 594 nm, 647 nm) and Zen Blue acquisition software (Zeiss; Oberkochen,
Germany). For each hemisphere, 2–3 randomly chosen 63x fields of view
within the dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus were acquired with 50–70
z-stack steps at 0.22 μm optimal spacing using identical settings.
Images were then processed in ImageJ (NIH) and individual images of
15–20 single cells per animal were processed in Imaris (Bitplane;
Zurich, Switzerland) as previously described ( Schafer et al., 2014 , Schafer et al., 2012 ). Engulfment analysis was
restricted to synaptic material within CD68-positive microglial lysosomes or
LAMP2-positive astrocytic lysosomes. Unbiased quantification of all images
was performed blind to genotype or treatment of animals.

For assessing the density of presynaptic inputs (VGluT1, VGluT2) and
postsynaptic compartments (Homer1, PSD-95), and for determining the
deposition of complement components (C1q, C3), two stained sections from
each sample containing the LGN (human and marmoset) or dorsal LGN (mice)
were imaged on a Zeiss LSM700 laser scanning confocal microscope equipped
with 405 nm, 488 nm, 555 nm, and 639 nm lasers and Zen black acquisition
software (Zeiss; Oberkochen, Germany). For each hemisphere, 2–3
randomly chosen 63x fields of view within the LGN were acquired with three
z-stack steps at 0.68 μm spacing. Identical settings were used to
acquire images from all samples within one experiment, and data analyses
were performed using ImageJ (NIH, version 1.52k) as described previously
with minor modifications ( Schafer et al.,
2012 , Hong et al., 2016a ).
First, to determine a consistent threshold range, sample images for each
genotype and condition were subjected to background subtraction and then
manual thresholding blinded to condition and genotype for each channel
within one experiment was performed (IsoData segmentation method,
85–255). Then, each channel from single z-planes of the z-stacks (3
z-planes per animal) were subjected to the same background subtraction and
thresholding, which was kept consistent for a given experiment. Using the
analyze particles function, the total area of presynaptic inputs,
postsynaptic compartments and complement component deposition was measured
from the thresholded images. To quantify the total area of structural
synapses, the image calculator tool was first used to visualize colocalized
pre- and postsynaptic puncta from the previously thresholded images. Then,
the analyze particles function was used to calculate the total area of
colocalized signals. Colocalization of complement components (C1q, C3) or
Crry-EGFP with presynaptic puncta was performed similarly. Data from single
planes was averaged for each z-stack of each field of view, and the mean of
all fields of view from one animal was determined to calculate
densities.

Similar to the quantification of synapses, densities of myelin (MOG,
MAG, MBP), axons (neurofilament, MAP2), as well as nodes of Ranvier
(βIV-spectrin) and paranodal junctions (CASPR) were determined. In
brief, 2–3 randomly chosen 20x fields of view within the region of
interest (ROI; LGN, optic nerve, optic tract) of 2–3 slides per
animal were acquired with three z-stack steps at 0.44 μm spacing from
each animal on a Zeiss Observer Spinning Disk Confocal microscope. Identical
settings were used for the acquisition of all images from one experiment,
and areas outlining the desired ROI (LGN, retina, optic nerve) were selected
and quantified blind to genotype or condition with ImageJ as described above
for the synapse analyses.

For determining the density of microglia (P2RY12), neurons (NeuN,
MAP2, RBPMS, Nissl), infiltrating peripheral immune cells (CD3, CD8, CD45,
FoxP3, Ly6C, Clec12a), apoptotic cells (cleaved caspase 3) and degenerating
axons (APP), single plane 10x and 20x fluorescence images were collected
from both hemispheres of at least two slices from each animal with a Zeiss
Observer microscope (Zeiss; Oberkochen, Germany). Identical settings were
used for the acquisition of all images from one experiment, and areas
outlining the desired ROIs (LGN, retina, optic nerve) were manually counted
blind to treatment or genotype using Zen Blue software (Zeiss). The counts
were normalized to the total area of the selected ROIs to calculate cell
densities.

For determination of GFAP, P2RY12, Clec7a, and Crry fluorescence
intensities in the LGN, 10x and 20x single plane epifluorescence images were
collected from both hemispheres of at least two slices from each animal with
a Zeiss Observer microscope equipped with Zen Blue software (Zeiss;
Oberkochen, Germany). Identical settings were used to acquire images for all
samples within one experiment and data analyses were performed using ImageJ
(NIH, version 1.52k) and blinded to genotype or conditions of samples.
Before quantification, thresholds of pixel intensity were set to the full
range of 16-bit images to ensure a consistent pixel range across all images
and background was subtracted from all images. To sample fluorescence
intensity, ROIs covering either the entire LGN or non-synaptic (VGluT
1 - and VGluT2 - ) and synaptic (VGluT 1 + and VGluT2 + ) areas of the LGN were manually selected for each
image and the raw integrated density of pixels within each ROI was measured.
Average intensity over all ROIs was quantified for each animal and then
normalized to the values of control treated animals.

For measuring the soma size of microglia, two sections from each
sample containing the dorsal LGN were immunostained against P2RY12 and
imaged on an Observer Spinning Disk Confocal microscope equipped with diode
lasers (405 nm, 488 nm, 594 nm, 647 nm) and Zen Blue acquisition software
(Zeiss; Oberkochen, Germany). For each hemisphere, 2–3 randomly
chosen 63x fields of view within the LGN were acquired with three z-stack
steps at 0.68 μm spacing. Manually thresholded maximum projections of
the z-stacks were generated using ImageJ and microglia soma were outlined
using the free hand ROI tool. The microglia soma area was then determined
using the analyze measure function.

RNA in situ hybridization was performed according
to the manufacturer’s specification (ACDBio; Newark, CA). Briefly,
two sections from each sample containing the LGN were treated with
“Protease III” for 20 minutes at 40°C, rinsed with
RNase free water and incubated with RNA in situ probes
against Il-6 (ACDBio, 315891) or Il- 1 β (ACDBio, 316891) for 2h
at 40°C. Subsequent amplification steps were performed according to
the manufacturer’s specification. Following in situ hybridization,
slices were washed in PBS, blocked for 30 min in 2% normal goat serum
containing 0.01% Triton X-100, and incubated with rabbit pAb α-P2RY12
(AnaSpec, AS-55043A, 1:2000) overnight at room temperature for
immunostaining of microglia. The following day, sections were washed,
incubated with the appropriate secondary antibody and mounted with
vectashield containing DAPI (Vector laboratories, Burlingame, CA, USA). For
each hemisphere, 2–3 randomly chosen 63x fields of view within the
LGN were acquired on an Observer Spinning Disk Confocal microscope equipped
with diode lasers (405 nm, 488 nm, 594 nm, 647 nm) and Zen Blue acquisition
software (Zeiss; Oberkochen, Germany). For quantification, fluorescent RNA
signals within P2RY12 + -microglia were counted manually using
ImageJ.

At the indicated time points, mice were deeply anesthetized and
transcardially perfused with 200 ml (10 ml/min) 2% paraformaldehyde and 1%
glutaraldehyde (Ted Pella) in 0.12M Millonig’s phosphate buffer (pH
7.3). Optic nerves were carefully dissected and post-fixed at 4°C for
an additional 4h in the same fixative. The specimens were then rinsed in
Millonig’s phosphate buffer, osmicated in 1% osmium tetroxide,
dehydrated in ethanol and propylene oxide (Ted Pella), and embedded in Epon
plastic resin (Ted Pella). Transverse ultrathin sections of 60–70 nm
thickness were collected using an RMC PowerTome ultramicrotome (Boeckeler
Instruments) on formvar coated single slot copper grids (Ted Pella),
counterstained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate. The sections were
analyzed under a transmission electron microscope operating at 80 KV (Tecnai
G2 Spirit Twin, FEI®, ThermoFisher Scientific®). Optic nerves
were photographed using a Gatan Orius SC 1000B digital camera
(Gatan®, Inc.) at 4,400 x magnification, and the images were used for
ultrastructural analysis and G-ratio calculations (G-ratio= axon
diameter/fiber diameter).

The pAAV-CB6-PI plasmid (4045 bp) (Gene Therapy Center, UMass
Medical School, Worcester, MA, USA) was used as vector backbone in this
study. Sequences encoding the complement inhibitor Crry fused to a CR2
sequence and followed by an autocleavage side and the sequence for EGFP were
synthesized as two separate gBlock gene fragments (IDT, Skokie, IL). The
first gBlock (1382 bp) encoded the sequence for the mature murine Crry
protein (residues 1–319, GenBank accession number NM013499 ) flanked by overhangs (~25bp) with the
backbone at the 5’-terminus and the second gBlock at the
3’-terminus (covering parts of the (G 4 S) 2 linker sequence). The second gBlock (1645 bp) encoded the sequence for a
(G 4 S) 2 linker directly fused to a sequence
encoding 4 N-terminal short consensus repeats of a CR2-sequence (residues
1257 of mature protein, GenBank accession number M35684 ), followed by the sequence of a porcine teschovirus-1 2A
(P2A) autocleavage site and the sequence for EGFP (New England Biolabs,
NEBuilder Assembly Tool 2.0.8). At the 3’-terminus, the second gBlock
was flanked by an overhang with the backbone and at the 5’-terminus
with an overhang (both ~25bp) identical to terminal parts of the Crry
sequence of the 3’-end of the first gBlock. Both gBlocks were
PCR-amplified, purified and cleaned before sequences were confirmed by
Sanger sequencing. To assemble gBlocks with the backbone, the one-step
isothermal NEBuilder HiFi DNA assembly cloning method has been utilized
according to the manufacture’s recommendations (New E ngland Biolabs,
Ipswich, MA, #E2621L). 4 μl of the assembly reaction were used for
transformation of Stbl3 chemically competent E. coli (Thermo Fisher Scientific, #C737303) and bacterial plasmid DNA extraction
was performed using QIAfilter Plasmid Mega Kit (Qiagen, #12281) according to
the manufacturer’s recommendations. Control constructs encoding the
sequence for EGFP but, lacking the sequences for Crry fused to CR2, were
generated by restriction enzyme digest (NheI/StyI) and religation of final
construct. Restriction analysis of the constructs was performed with the
following enzymes or combination of enzymes: SmoI, HincIII, XhoI/XbaI,
BamHI, SalI/XhoI, XhoI, BamsHI/EcoRV and HindIII (all from New England
Biolabs). The final constructs were further verified by sequencing analysis
and subsequently packaged as AAV9 vectors by the UMass Viral Vector Core of
the Gene Therapy Center at the University of Massachusetts Medical
School.

Four-week-old mice were deeply anesthetized with isoflurane, the
surrounding tissue around the eye was swabbed with 5% povidone-iodine, and
an incision was made into the sclera (app. 2 mm posterior of the superior
limbus) using a sterile, sharp 30G needle. After careful removal of the 30G
needle, a 33G blunt needle (Hamilton, 1.57PT3, #7803–05) attached to
a 10 μl gastight syringe (Hamilton, #1701) was carefully inserted
into the same incision and viral suspension was injected into the vitreous
without damaging the lens or retina. Viral suspension (3 μl) was
injected at a titer of 2.5 ×10 13 genome copies (GC)/ml.
After injection, the needle was kept inside the vitreous for ~1 min.
Mice received injections into both eyes. Finally, ophthalmic antibiotic
ointment and local anesthetic were applied. Mice were placed in their home
cage on a 37°C heating pad and monitored until they recovered from
anesthesia. Twenty-eight days after AAV-injection, EAE was induced in the
mice as described above. Only mice that showed substantial colocalization
(<35%) of EGFP with VGluT2 + -retinogeniculate terminals in
the LGN were included in the analyses.

Murine neuro-2a cells (N2a) were purchased from ATCC (#CCL-131) and
cultured in DMEM (Thermo Fisher) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum
(HyClone, USA) and 1% penicillin-streptomycin at 37°C in a humidified
incubator. At ~80% confluency, cells were passaged. For AAV-mediated
transduction, N2a cells were seeded and, after full attachment to the plate,
treated with 25 ^M all trans-retinoic acid (RA, Sigma, #R2625) to induce
neurite outgrowth. The next day, cells were inoculated with either AAV-Crry
or AAV-EGFP with a MOI of 10 5 GC/cell. AAVs were removed 48h
after infection and cells were harvested or fixed for analysis another five
days later.

Samples were lysed in T-PER (Thermo Scientific), boiled at
95°C for 10 min, separated on 4–20% Mini-PROTEAN TGX Gels
under reducing conditions, and transferred to polyvinylidene diflouride
membrane. After blocking with 5% (w/v) non-fat milk/PBS (all from BioRad),
membranes were incubated with the following antibodies: mouse mAb
α-Crry (clone TLD-1C11, Santa Cruz, sc-53530, 1:100), rabbit pAb
a-EGFP (Millipore, ab3080P, 1:1000), goat pAb α-GAPDH (Abcam, ab9483,
1:1000), and respective peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibodies (BioRad).
Signals were visualized by enhanced chemiluminescence. Prior to the
detection of further antigens on the same membrane, antibodies were washed
off with Restore Plus Western Blot Stripping Buffer (Thermo Scientific).

Assessment of visual acuity was performed before the induction of
EAE and at the onset of clinical symptoms in awake, freely moving mice.
Individual mice were placed on a round, elevated platform in the center of a
soundproof chamber that was surrounded by four computer screens on which
visual stimuli were projected. Mice were exposed to a virtual cylinder
consisting of rotating sine wave gratings (12 deg/sec) of various spatial
frequencies (cycles/degree). Mice reflexively track these gratings by
stereotypic head movements as long as the grating is visible ( Prusky et al., 2004 ). To determine
grating acuity, first a homogeneous gray stimulus was projected on the
cylinder, which was followed by a low-spatial-frequency (0.05 cyc/deg) sine
wave grating of the same mean luminance that was randomly rotating in one
horizontal direction. A video camera positioned in the lid of the chamber
directly above the animal was used by a trained observer to record the mice
and assess smooth, reflexive head movements in response to the rotating
gratings. To determine the highest spatial frequency perceptible for each
individual mouse, the spatial frequency of the grating was systematically
increased until the animal no longer responded to the projected grating.
Visual acuity was assessed blind to treatment of animals.

Results are expressed as means ± standard error (SEM) from at
least three independent replicates for each experimental group. Two-tailed
Student’s t-test to compare two groups or one-way analysis of variance
(ANOVA) followed by Tukey’s multiple comparison post hoc test to compare multiple groups was performed using Prism 7 software (Graph-Pad,
La Jolla, CA, USA). Values of *P<0.05, **P<0.01, ***P<
0.001, ****P< 0.0001 were considered statistically significant.

## KEY RESOURCES TABLE
The table highlights the genetically modified organisms and strains, cell
lines, reagents, software, and source data essential to reproduce
results presented in the manuscript. Depending on the nature of the study, this may
include standard laboratory materials (i.e., food chow for metabolism studies), but
the Table is not meant to be comprehensive list of all materials and
resources used (e.g., essential chemicals such as SDS, sucrose, or standard culture
media don’t need to be listed in the Table). Items in the Table must
also be reported in the Method Details section within the context of their use. The number of primers
and RNA sequences that may be listed in the Table is restricted to no
more than ten each. If there are more than ten primers or RNA sequences to report,
please provide this information as a supplementary document and reference this file
(e.g., See Table S1 for XX)
in the Key Resources Table .

Please report the information as follows:

REAGENT or RESOURCE: Provide full descriptive name
of the item so that it can be identified and linked with its description
in the manuscript (e.g., provide version number for software, host
source for antibody, strain name). In the Experimental Models section, please include all models used
in the paper and describe each line/strain as: model organism: name used
for strain/line in paper: genotype. (i.e., Mouse: OXTR fl/fl :
B6.129(SJL)-Oxtr tml1Wsy/J ). In the Biological Samples
section, please list all samples obtained from commercial sources or
biological repositories. Please note that software mentioned in the Methods Details or Data and
Software Availability section needs to be also included in the table.
See the sample Table at the end of this document for examples of how to
report reagents.

SOURCE: Report the company, manufacturer, or
individual that provided the item or where the item can obtained (e.g.,
stock center or repository). For materials distributed by Addgene,
please cite the article describing the plasmid and include
“Addgene” as part of the identifier. If an item is from
another lab, please include the name of the principal investigator and a
citation if it has been previously published. If the material is being
reported for the first time in the current paper, please indicate as
“this paper.” For software, please provide the company
name if it is commercially available or cite the paper in which it has
been initially described.

IDENTIFIER: Include catalog numbers (entered in the
column as “Cat#” followed by the number, e.g., Cat#3879S).
Where available, please include unique entities such as RRIDs, Model
Organism Database numbers, accession numbers, and PDB or CAS IDs. For
antibodies, if applicable and available, please also include the lot
number or clone identity. For software or data resources, please include
the URL where the resource can be downloaded. Please ensure accuracy of
the identifiers, as they are essential for generation of hyperlinks to
external sources when available. Please see the Elsevier list of Data
Repositories with automated bidirectional linking for details. When
listing more than one identifier for the same item, use semicolons to
separate them (e.g. Cat#3879S; RRID: AB_2255011). If an identifier is
not available, please enter “N/A” in the column. A NOTE ABOUT RRIDs: We
highly recommend using RRIDs as the identifier (in
particular for antibodies and organisms, but also for
software tools and databases). For more details on how to
obtain or generate an RRID for existing or newly generated
resources, please visit the RII or search for RRIDs.

A NOTE ABOUT RRIDs: We
highly recommend using RRIDs as the identifier (in
particular for antibodies and organisms, but also for
software tools and databases). For more details on how to
obtain or generate an RRID for existing or newly generated
resources, please visit the RII or search for RRIDs.

Please use the empty table that follows to organize the information in
the sections defined by the subheading, skipping sections not relevant to your
study. Please do not add subheadings. To add a row, place the cursor at the end
of the row above where you would like to add the row, just outside the right
border of the table. Then press the ENTER key to add the row. Please delete
empty rows. Each entry must be on a separate row; do not list multiple items in
a single table cell. Please see the sample table at the end of this document for
examples of how reagents should be cited.

## TABLE FOR AUTHOR TO COMPLETE
Please upload the completed table as a separate document. Please do
not add subheadings to the Key Resources Table . If you wish to make an
entry that does not fall into one of the subheadings below, please contact your
handling editor. ( NOTE: For authors publishing in Current Biology,
please note that references within the KRT should be in numbered style, rather than
Harvard.)