# Title
Regulation of Lifespan by Neural Excitation and REST

# Abstract
The mechanisms that extend lifespan in humans are poorly understood. Here
we show that extended longevity in humans is associated with a distinct
transcriptome signature in the cerebral cortex characterized by downregulation
of genes related to neural excitation and synaptic function. In the model system C. elegans , neural excitation increases with age and
inhibition of excitation globally, or in glutamatergic or cholinergic neurons,
increases longevity. Furthermore, longevity is dynamically regulated by the
excitatory-inhibitory balance of neural circuits. The REST transcription factor
is upregulated in humans with extended longevity and represses
excitation-related genes. Notably, REST-deficient mice exhibit increased
cortical activity and neuronal excitability during aging. Similarly,
loss-of-function mutations in the C. elegans REST orthologs spr -3 and spr-4 elevate neural excitation
and reduce the lifespan of long-lived daf-2 mutants. In
wild-type worms, spr-4 overexpression suppresses excitation and
extends lifespan. REST, SPR-3/4 and reduced excitation activate the
longevity-associated transcription factors FOXO1 and DAF-16 in mammals and
worms, respectively. These findings reveal a conserved mechanism of aging
mediated by neural circuit activity and regulated by REST.

## Neural excitation and longevity
Previous studies of the aging human brain have shown dynamic gene expression
changes that distinguish young adults from the aging population 8 . However, the recent expansion of human aging
cohorts has increased the statistical power for partitioning the aging population
into subgroups based on transcriptome profiling. To gain insight into gene
expression changes in the brain associated with extended human longevity, we
analyzed RNA-seq 9 , 10 and microarray data 11 from the frontal cortex of aged individuals
with intact cognitive function in three different cohorts. Age-associated genes were
compared between all individuals and Pearson correlation coefficients were derived.
Hierarchical clustering suggested that the aging population partitioned into three
groups ( Extended Data Fig. 1a – c ). The most significant changes associated with
the extended longevity groups (≥85 versus ≤80 years of age) were
downregulation of neural excitation/synaptic function genes and upregulation of
immune function genes ( Fig. 1a – d , Extended Data
Fig. 1d – f , Supplementary Tables 1 – 6 ). This did not change after
adjusting for the presence of amyloid deposits and neurofibrillary tangles in the
ROSMAP cohort (data not shown). Meta-analysis of gene ontology (GO) enrichment in
each cohort indicated that terms related to excitatory, but not inhibitory synaptic
transmission were enriched in the downregulated genes ( Extended Data Fig. 1g , Supplementary Table 7 ). These results suggest that extended human
longevity may be associated with reduced excitatory neurotransmission.

To explore the neural regulation of longevity, we utilized C.
elegans , a well-established model system of aging. Neural excitation in C. elegans was monitored by GCaMP calcium imaging in the
glutamatergic ASH neurons 12 . In
wild-type worms, rapid, transient pulses of GCaMP fluorescence indicative of
neuronal excitation were observed ( Supplementary Video 1 ). Calcium influx in ASH neurons increased
significantly during normal aging from adult day 1-2 to day 12-16 ( Fig. 1e ). To determine the effect of decreasing calcium
influx on lifespan, worms were treated with nemadipine, an inhibitor of L-type
calcium channels that reduces neural excitation ( Fig.
1f ). Continuous treatment with nemadipine beginning at adult day 1
significantly extended lifespan ( Fig. 1g ).
Moreover, incubation of worms with ivermectin, an agonist of invertebrate
glutamate-gated chloride channels, suppressed neural excitation and resulted in a
dose-dependent extension of mean lifespan ( Fig.
1h , i ). Nemadipine and ivermectin
also extended lifespan when administered at day 8 when feeding activity has largely
abated ( Extended Data Fig. 2a ), suggesting that
the drugs do not act through caloric restriction. Furthermore, worm motility was
preserved ( Extended Data Fig. 2b , Supplementary Videos
4 – 6 ).
These results suggest that global inhibition of neural excitation extends lifespan
in C. elegans .

To explore the neural systems that mediate lifespan, we expressed a
transgenic Drosophila histamine-gated chloride channel (HisCl1) in
different neuronal populations 13 .
Addition of histamine, which is not endogenously produced by worms, activates HisCl1
and inhibits neural excitation. First, we expressed HisCl1 under the control of a
pan-neuronal promoter. Continuous incubation with histamine beginning on adult day 1
or day 8 significantly extended mean lifespan ( Extended Data Fig. 3a , b , i ). There was no effect of histamine on the
lifespan of wild-type worms that did not express HisCl1 ( Supplementary Table 22 ).

We next expressed the HisCl1 channel in glutamatergic and cholinergic
neurons, the major excitatory neuronal populations in C. elegans .
Repression of excitation in either population robustly extended lifespan whether
initiated at adult day 1 or day 8 ( Extended Data Fig.
3c – f , i ). Expression of HisCl1 in GABAergic neurons using an unc-47 driver extended lifespan when initiated at day 1, but
reduced lifespan when initiated at day 8 ( Extended
Data Fig. 3g – i ). GCaMP
imaging showed that addition of histamine to unc-47 : HisCl1 worms
at day 1 resulted in a marked and persistent suppression of excitation in ASH
neurons, which was not observed after addition at day 8 ( Extended Data Fig. 3j ). Thus, blockade of GABAergic
neurotransmission early in adult life may result in compensatory downregulation of
excitation in other neuronal populations. Taken together, these results suggest that
continuous or late-life repression of neural excitation in multiple different
neuronal cell populations extends lifespan in C. elegans .

To explore the effect of hyperexcitation on lifespan, we suppressed GABAergic
neurotransmission by using RNAi, which would be predicted to be less extensive than
histamine-HisCL1-mediated blockade. When worms were treated with RNAi against the
GABA vesicular transporter unc-47 , there was a robust increase in
the excitation of ASH neurons and a significant reduction in lifespan ( Extended Data Figure 4a , b ). Thus, the effects of neurotransmission on lifespan are
bidirectional; lifespan is extended by reducing excitation and shortened by
increasing excitation.

Neural activity can regulate neuropeptide secretion. To address the role of
neuropeptide signaling in lifespan regulation, we evaluated worms with loss-of
function of the egl-3 proprotein convertase from an egl-3 mutation or egl -3 RNAi. The egl-3 mutants exhibited significant lifespan extension ( Extended Data Fig. 4c ). Lifespan extension was
also observed in worms treated with egl-3 RNAi ( Extended Data Fig. 4d ), consistent with previous
results 14 . A similar
extension of lifespan was observed in a glutamatergic loss-of-function eat-4 mutant and the synaptic transmission mutant unc-13 ( Extended Data Fig.
4c ). These results suggest that both synaptic neurotransmission and
peptidergic signaling contribute to lifespan regulation.

## REST and the modulation of neural excitation in the aging brain
We have previously demonstrated that the transcriptional repressor REST is
induced in the aging brain 15 .
Genes that were downregulated in the brain in individuals with extended longevity
were enriched for the canonical REST RE1 motif in all three aging cohorts (ROSMAP:
P=5e-12, CommonMind Consortium: P=8e-4, Gibbs: P=1e-2) ( Supplementary Tables 1 , 3 , 5 ). Moreover, unbiased analysis by
ChIP-seq showed that REST was the most strongly implicated transcription factor in
multiple ENCODE datasets ( Supplementary Tables 8 – 11 ). Furthermore, the downregulated
gene set was highly enriched for neuronal REST target genes ( Supplementary Table 12 ). Expression of
these downregulated genes, as well as an index of synaptic gene expression, were
inversely related to REST mRNA expression ( Fig.
2a , b ; Extended Data Fig. 5a , b ). Furthermore, nuclear REST levels were significantly elevated in
prefrontal cortical neurons in centenarians relative to individuals who were 70-80
years of age ( Fig. 2c ). Although REST mRNA
expression is upregulated in the brain during aging 15 , increased REST mRNA expression did not
distinguish the extended longevity versus normal aging groups based on
RNA-sequencing ( Supplementary
Tables 1 , 3 ).
However, for a given level of REST mRNA expression, there is greater gene
downregulation in the extended longevity group ( Extended Data Fig. 5c , d ). These
results suggest that REST repressor function is upregulated in the brain in
individuals with extended longevity, resulting in downregulation of genes that
mediate excitation and synaptic function.

To assess the role of REST as a modulator of neural activity in the aging
mammalian brain, we examined the uptake of fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) by PET-CT in the
brains of 18 month old Nestin-Cre:REST lx/lx (REST cKO) mice and
littermate controls ( Extended Data Fig.
5e ) 16 . REST cKO
mice showed significantly elevated cortical 18 FDG uptake, indicative of
increased neural activity ( Fig. 2d , e ). Previous studies suggest that REST can
modulate excitability in mouse models of epilepsy induced by kindling or
kainate 16 , 17 . To assess excitability during aging, we
performed electroencephalographic (EEG) recordings of REST cKO mice ( Supplementary Table 13 ). Intermittent
epileptiform discharges were significantly more frequent in 22-month-old REST cKO
mice than in controls ( Fig. 2f ). Furthermore,
challenge with the GABA antagonist pentylenetetrazol (PTZ) significantly increased
seizure duration in REST cKO mice relative to controls ( Fig. 2g ), with a trend to increased mortality ( Extended Data Fig. 5f ). These results suggest
that REST globally represses neural activity and prevents hyperexcitation in the
aging brain.

## Regulation of longevity and neural excitation byC. elegansREST
orthologs
The C. elegans gene spr -4 is a structural
and functional ortholog of mammalian REST that protects against toxic stressors,
such as reactive oxygen species and amyloid β-protein 15 . To determine if spr-4 modulates lifespan, we induced endogenous spr-4 expression by
utilizing the RNA-guided endonuclease Cas9 as a programmable transcription
factor 18 . A
nuclease-deficient variant of Cas9 (dCas9) was fused to the transcriptional
activator VP16 (dCas9::VP64) and stably introduced into C. elegans together with four small guide RNAs (sgRNAs) targeting the spr-4 promoter. This resulted in a modest elevation of spr-4 mRNA and
protein expression, and a significant increase in mean lifespan ( Extended Data Fig. 6a – d ). Expression of dCas9::VP64 and spr-4 sgRNAs in worms with the loss-of-function allele spr-4 ( tm465 ) did not affect lifespan,
suggesting specificity for spr-4 ( Extended Data Fig. 6e ). Moreover, spr-4 overexpression
robustly reduced excitation in ASH neurons ( Extended
Data Fig. 6f ). Thus, spr -4 both represses neural
excitation and extends lifespan.

The forkhead transcription factor DAF-16 is the central downstream target of
the daf-2 /insulin IGF-like signaling pathway that regulates
lifespan in C. elegans . RNAi-mediated knockdown of DAF-16 prevented
lifespan extension by spr-4 overexpression ( Extended Data Fig. 7a ). Furthermore, lifespan extension by
the neural excitation inhibitors nemadipine and ivermectin was also dependent on daf-16 , and ivermectin elevates both total and nuclear levels
of DAF-16 ( Extended Data Fig. 7b – d ). Thus, daf-16 mediates
lifespan extension by spr -4 and neural suppression.

To further explore the effects of REST orthologs on the daf-2 / daf-16 signaling pathway, we performed daf-2 RNAi in wild-type, spr-3 and spr-4 loss-of-function mutants, and an spr-4 ; spr-3 double mutant. As previously
shown 19 , daf-2 RNAi extends lifespan by ~50% in wild-type worms.
Mutations of spr-3 , spr-4 , or both, significantly
reduced lifespan extension by daf-2 RNAi ( Extended Data Fig. 8a ). Mutations in spr-3 and spr-4 also reduced the lifespan
extension associated with the loss-of-function daf-2 ( e1370 ) allele; the greatest reduction
occurred in the spr-4;spr-3;daf-2 triple mutant ( Fig. 3a ). The spr-3 and spr-4 mutants did not affect lifespan in a wild-type background
( Extended Data Fig. 8b ), in contrast to a
previous report that suggested a lifespan effect of spr-3 mutants 20 . These results
suggest that spr-3 and spr-4 contribute to the
regulation of lifespan by the insulin/IGF-like signaling pathway in worms.

We next asked whether the C. elegans orthologs spr-3 and spr-4 function in neurons to
regulate lifespan. To address this question, we utilized a C.
elegans line in which RNAi was abolished by deletion of the
double-stranded RNA transporter sid-1 , but restored specifically in
neurons by a sid-1 transgene driven by a neuron-specific
promoter 21 . These alleles
were crossed into the daf-2(e1370) mutant background, and
RNAi-mediated knockdown of both spr-3 and spr-4 was performed. Neuronal knockdown of SPR-3 and SPR-4 significantly reduced lifespan
( Fig. 3b , Extended Data Fig. 8c ). Thus, neuronal expression of spr-3 and spr-4 contributes to lifespan
extension in the daf-2 mutant.

To gain further insight into the effects of spr-3 and spr-4 on daf-2 function and lifespan, we
performed RNA-seq on wild-type worms and worms with mutations in spr-4;spr-3, daf-2 , and spr-4;3;daf -2 (triple
mutants) ( Extended Data Fig. 8d ; Supplementary Table 14 ). The
comparison of triple mutant spr-4;3;daf-2 worms with single mutant daf-2 worms was notable for highly significant transcriptome
changes in GO terms related to neural excitation, signaling and synaptic function
( Fig. 3c , Supplementary Table 15 ). Furthermore,
gene expression changes in daf-2 mutants and spr-4;3 mutants were overlapping ( Extended Data Fig. 8e ), and genes downregulated in daf-2 mutants but upregulated in the spr-4;3;daf-2 triple mutants were enriched for GO terms related
to neural excitation ( Supplementary Table 16 ). These results suggest that repression of
neuronal genes is a conserved regulatory feature of REST and its worm orthologs.

A central question is whether SPR-3 and SPR-4 affect lifespan by suppressing
neural excitation. GCaMP calcium imaging showed that neural excitation was strongly
suppressed in daf -2 mutants both in young adult worms and during
aging ( Fig. 4a , b ; Extended Data Fig. 8f ). The spr-4;3 mutations partially restored neural excitation in daf-2 mutants ( Fig. 4a , b , Supplementary Videos 1 – 3 ), but did not increase
excitation in wild-type worms ( Extended Data Fig.
8g ). Suppression of excitation in daf -2 mutants was not
mediated by neuronal DAF-16 ( Extended Data Fig.
8h ). However, inhibition of neural excitation with ivermectin reversed
the lifespan shortening effect of spr-4;3 mutations in daf-2 mutant worms ( Fig.
4c ). Thus, SPR-3 and SPR-4 contribute to the extreme longevity of daf-2 mutant worms by repressing neural excitation.

To identify the neural systems affected by SPR-4 and SPR-3,
neurotransmitters and neuropeptides were targeted by RNAi in spr-4;3;daf-2 triple mutants and d af-2 single
mutants. The most significant lifespan effects were observed following RNAi directed
against signaling through glutamatergic ( eat-4 ), cholinergic
( cha-1/unc-17 ) and monoaminergic ( cat-2 )
neurons, and by RNAi to axonal kinesin ( unc-104 ) and the proprotein
convertase ( egl-3 ) ( Fig. 4d , Extended data Fig. 8i ). These results
suggest that SPR-3 and SPR-4 suppress excitatory neurotransmitter systems, as well
as neuropeptide signaling, to extend lifespan in daf-2 mutant
worms.

Loss-of-function of daf-2 extends lifespan through
activation of DAF-16 22 . Following daf -2 RNAi, spr-4;3 mutants showed reduced
total and nuclear DAF-16 levels ( Extended Data Fig.
9a ). RNA-seq analysis of day10 spr-4;3;daf-2 triple
mutant worms showed a significant reduction in the expression of DAF-16 target genes
relative to daf-2 single mutants ( Extended Data Fig. 9b – d , Supplementary Tables
17 , 18 ).
Furthermore, inhibition of neural excitation by ivermectin restored DAF-16 levels in spr-4;3 mutants following daf-2 RNAi ( Extended Data Fig. 9e ). Thus, SPR-3 and SPR-4
suppress neural excitation ( Fig. 4a , b ), which leads to the activation of DAF-16.

## REST, FOXO1 and Neural Excitation
We next asked if the association between REST, neural excitation and human
longevity ( Fig. 2a – c ) might be mediated by a mammalian forkhead transcription
factor orthologous to C. elegans DAF-16. REST has been shown to
regulate the expression of FOXO1 in SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells 15 . In the human brain, REST mRNA expression
was positively correlated with FOXO1 expression, but did not correlate with the
expression of other FOXO family members ( Fig.
5a , Extended Data Fig. 10a ).
Furthermore, REST and FOXO1 co-localized in neurons of the aging human prefrontal
cortex ( Extended Data Fig. 10b ), and nuclear
levels of REST and FOXO1 were strongly positively correlated in all age groups
( Fig. 5b ).

To determine whether REST regulates FOXO1 expression in the brain, we
examined REST cKO and littermate control mice. FOXO1 localized predominantly to
cortical neurons, and showed an age-related increase in 18 month old relative to 9
month old control mice ( Fig. 5c ). Age-dependent
induction of nuclear FOXO1 was abolished in REST cKO mice ( Fig. 5c ). Thus, regulation of forkhead transcription
factors is a conserved feature of REST and its C. elegans orthologs.

To explore the role of neural excitation in FOXO1 regulation, primary mouse
cortical neuronal cultures were treated with kynurenic acid, a broad spectrum
glutamate receptor antagonist, or with either APV or NBQX, NMDA and AMPA/kainate
receptor antagonists, respectively. Kynurenic acid and NBQX significantly increased
nuclear and total FOXO1 levels ( Extended Data Fig.
10c ). Thus, FOXO1 is regulated by glutamatergic signaling in mammalian
cortical neurons, paralleling the effect of neural excitation on DAF-16 in
worms.

## Discussion
Here we show that extended longevity and cognitive preservation in humans is
associated with coordinate downregulation of genes that mediate excitatory
neurotransmission. In the model system C.elegans , an increase in
the activity of excitatory neurons is a normal concomitant of aging. Global
inhibition of neural excitation, or inhibition of specific excitatory neuronal
populations, particularly glutamatergic or cholinergic neurons, resulted in robust
lifespan extension. These findings are consistent with previous studies which showed
that the anticonvulsants ethosuximide and valproic acid can extend lifespan in C. elegans 23 – 25 . Moreover, we found that lifespan was
dynamically regulated by the excitatory-inhibitory balance of neural circuits. Thus,
an imbalance between neural excitation and inhibition might degrade neural function
and contribute to the aging process.

Our findings suggest that REST and the C. elegans orthologs
SPR-3/4 regulate aging by reducing neural activity as transcriptional repressors of
synaptic genes. Aging conditional REST-deficient mice exhibit increased cortical
neural activity and hyperexcitability. This is consistent with previous studies in
neuronal cell culture which suggest that REST maintains neural network homeostasis
by buffering changes in neural excitation 26 , 27 .

It is intriguing that REST and neural activity converge with insulin/IGF
signaling to regulate the activity of forkhead transcription factors that play
pivotal roles in lifespan regulation 22 , 28 . The activation
of daf-16 by REST orthologs in worms and FOXO1 by REST in humans
might be a mechanism for integration of neural activity with metabolism. We suggest
that activating REST and reducing excitatory neural activity may be an approach to
slowing aging in humans.

## Materials and Methods
Postmortem human brain material was procured in accordance with
institutional guidelines governed by approved protocols. Tissue samples were
procured from the Rush University Medical Center and the Brigham and
Women’s Hospital. Tissue samples (both paraffin-embedded and frozen) from
Rush University Medical Center were derived from participants in the Religious
Order Study (ROS) and Rush Memory and Aging Project (MAP) at the Rush
Alzheimer’s Disease Center, which are longitudinal, clinical-pathologic
studies of aging, cognitive decline and AD 29 , 30 . Study
participants agreed to comprehensive annual clinical and neuropsychological
evaluation and brain donation at death. Twenty-one cognitive function tests were
employed in the present study, including a summary score of all 17 tests used as
a measure of global cognition, and separate measures of episodic, semantic, and
working memory, perceptual speed, and visuospatial ability. The follow-up rate
exceeds 95% and the autopsy rate exceeds 90%. All autopsy cases underwent a
uniform structured neuropathologic evaluation of AD, including assignment of
Braak (measure of number and distribution of neurofibrillary tangles), CERAD
(Aβ plaque pathology), and NIA-Reagan (composite measure of
neurofibrillary tangles and amyloid plaques) scores. Paraffin-embedded brain
samples were also obtained from the Brigham and Women’s Hospital. These
samples included young adult cases without neurological abnormalities.

Immunofluorescence analysis using paraffin-embedded brain sections was
performed in the prefrontal cortex (Broadmann areas 9, 10 and 47).
Paraffin-embedded tissue sections were first deparaffinized in xylene, then
rehydrated with decreasing concentrations of ethanol and placed in water.
Sections then underwent antigen retrieval using the Diva decloaker (BioCare,
USA). They were then washed and blocked with 2% BSA, 0.1% Triton X-100 in PBS
for 1 hr at room temperature. Primary antibodies were diluted in 2% BSA, 0.1%
Triton in PBS. Following overnight incubations, sections were washed three times
with PBS. Secondary antibodies, diluted in 2% BSA, 0.1% Triton in PBS were
either biotin-coupled (1:200, Vector Labs, USA) or coupled to Alexa fluorophores
(1:300, Invitrogen). Sections were incubated with 1% Sudan Black in 80% ethanol,
for 10 minutes, to suppress lipofuscin autofluorescence. Following washes in
PBS, sections were mounted and imaged using confocal microscopy. The following
antibodies have been used for immunolabeling studies: (i) a rabbit polyclonal
IgG recognizing a region between residues 1050 and the C-terminus (residue 1097)
of REST (Bethyl laboratories, IHC-00141); (ii) a goat polyclonal IgG recognizing
the C-terminal region of FOXO1a (LSBio B415, discontinued, replaced with LSBio
1322). To quantify immunofluorescence, images that were randomly acquired in
selected brain regions were analyzed in the Metamorph® image analysis
system. Antigen-expressing areas within each neuron (such as the nucleus) were
selected using the average signal intensity measured. Values were corrected by
subtracting the average slide background intensity (measured outside of cells).
The investigator was blinded to sample origin or diagnosis.

To assess the relationship between the levels of nuclear REST protein
and FOXO1, we performed confocal immunofluorescence with triple-labeling for
REST, MAP2 and FOXO1. Multiple 40x pictures were acquired (at various locations)
within the prefrontal cortex displaying pyramidal neurons using an Olympus
Fluoview Confocal Microscope. For cases displaying a majority of pyramidal
neurons with very high (or very low) nuclear REST levels, fields were also
included that displayed lower (or higher, respectively) REST levels, to test for
potential correlations between REST and FOXO1. Antigen-expressing areas within
neuronal nuclei were selected using the Metamorph® image analysis system
and the average signal intensity was measured. Values were corrected by
subtracting the average slide background intensity (measured outside of cells).
Between 70 and 115 pyramidal neurons were quantified for each case.

Animal housing and experimental procedures were approved by the
Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of Harvard Medical School. Mice
carrying floxed alleles of REST flanking exon 2 were described
previously 31 , 32 . These mice were crossed to
Nestin-Cre transgenic mice (Jackson laboratory; strain No. 003771) to achieve
REST conditional inactivation in the nervous system. The Nes-Cre transgene is in
the C57BL/6J background, and the RESTlx/lx alleles were in a hybrid C57BL/6J and
129Sv/Ev background. The resulting Nestin-Cre:RESTlx/lx conditional knockout
mice (hybrid C57BL/6J and 129Sv/Ev background), referred to as REST cKO, were
born at expected Mendelian ratios, were viable and fertile, and did not display
any visible alterations. The control group included RESTlx/lx and Nes-Cre mice.
Mouse genotyping by PCR was performed using the following primers to amplify a
region in the REST gene flanking exon 2: re08
(5′-CATGCGAGTACTGCCATACCCAAC-3′), re09
(5′-GTGATGGGGCAGTCTTCTGGAGG-3′), and re11
(5′-GGCACACCTTTAATCCTAGCTTC-3′); this allowed the identification
of WT (220 bp), floxed (264 bp) or recombined (375 bp) REST
alleles. The experimental groups included both male and female mice. The REST
cKO and REST+/+ control groups were composed of littermate mice (same genetic
background). Mice were identified by eartag numbers, and were randomly selected
for PET/CT and EEG experiments, as well as histological processing (perfusion,
brain dissection, etc.).

Mice were anesthetized with isoflurane and carbon dioxide and then
perfused with cold PBS buffer for 20 minutes. Brains were rapidly removed and
placed in 4% PFA overnight. They were then processed for paraffin embedding,
according to standard procedures. The investigator was blind to the genotype. To
assess FOXO1 nuclear expression in cortical neurons, coronal brain sections from
WT and REST conditional KO mice (aged 9 or 18 months) were immunolabeled with
FOXO1 and MAP2 antibodies. Cortical neurons (MAP2-positive) were identified and
FOXO1 mean fluorescence intensity in each nucleus was measured using the
Metamorph software. Between 50-100 neuronal nuclei were assessed for FOXO1
expression, and the mean FOXO1 nuclear expression was derived for each animal.
To confirm REST deficiency ( Extended Data Fig.
5e ), REST cKO mouse cortical sections were labeled with an anti-REST
antibody provided by the Hsieh lab (see Supplementary Table 20 ).

Mice were anesthetized with 3% isoflurane (Baxter Medical) and medical
grade oxygen at a rate of 1 L/min. A CT scout scan was done first, followed by a
CT scan and a dynamic PET scan. Each mouse received the same dose per gram of
body weight, 1.75 Ci/g 18 Fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) tracer solution by tail vein injection, followed by a
0.1 ml saline flush. Dynamic PET imaging for each mouse was immediately
performed for 1 hour (in vivo PET) using a small animal PET/CT scanner (eXplore
Vista; GE Healthcare). The spatial resolution of the PET scanner was 1.6 mm at
the center of the field-of-view. The data were acquired in 3D mode at the energy
window of 250–700 keV, which yields 4% count sensitivity. For each
timepoint, 5 or 6 3-D volumes, spanning cortical and subcortical regions, were
selected in the center of the brain of the animal, with volumes of .2
cm 3 each, and used for quantification using the eXplore Vista
software. Averages of these regions were used as the standard uptake value (SUV)
for the animal.

Primary cortical neuronal cultures, derived from E16.5 wildtype C57BL/6J
fetuses, were plated in 10% serum-containing neuronal culture media (neurobasal
medium containing B27 supplements, penicillin, streptomycin, and GlutaMax) on
either coverslips or culture dishes that were pre-coated with poly-L-ornithine
(Sigma p4957). Medium was changed 4 hours after initial plating to serum-free
neuronal culture media, and then a half-medium change was performed every three
days.

Mice were implanted with wireless telemetry units (PhysioTel
ETA-F10; Data Sciences International, DSI, St. Paul, MN) under appropriate
sterile technique per laboratory protocol as previously described 33 , 34 35 , 36 . Mice were anesthetized by
intraperitoneal (i.p.) injection of 100 mg/kg ketamine (Putney Vet,
Portland, ME) and 10 mg/kg xylazine (Lloyd Inc, Shenandoah, IA). The
transmitter was placed intraperitoneally, and electrodes were threaded
subcutaneously to the cranium. After skull exposure, hemostasis, and
identification of cranial sutures, bregma and lambda, two burr holes, 1 mm
diameter, were drilled over the right olfactory bulb (reference) and left
occipital cortex (active). The telemetry units’ epidural electrodes
connected to the leads of the transmitter were placed into the burr holes
and secured by stainless steel skull screws. Once in place, the skull screws
were covered with dental cement (Dentsply International Inc., Milford, DE).
Mice were subcutaneously injected at 0 and 24 hours post-operatively with 5
mg/kg meloxicam (Norbrook Laboratories, Newry, Northern Ireland) for
analgesia. After 1 week of recovery, mice were individually housed in their
home cages in a 12 hour light/12 hour dark, temperature, and humidity
controlled chamber with ad libitum access to food and water in preparation
for recording.

One-channel video-EEG was recorded differentially between the
reference (right olfactory bulb) and active (left occipital lobe) electrodes
after 24 h of acclimation in recording chambers. EEG (1000 Hz), core-body
temperature and locomotor activity (200 Hz) signals were continuously
sampled over a period of 48h along with time-registered videos. At the end
of baseline EEG acquisition, all mice were provoked with a convulsive dose
(40 mg/kg; i.p.) of pentylenetetrazol (PTZ; Sigma-Aldrich, Co., St. Louis,
MO), a GABAA receptor antagonist, to measure seizure susceptibility and
evaluate seizure thresholds 33 , 36 . Mice were
continuously monitored for clinical and electrographic epileptiform activity
during both periods and post hoc verified by the blinded review of the video
EEG. Following PTZ administration, latency to generalized tonic-clonic
seizures (GTCs), number of seizures and, total duration of GTCs were
recorded per mouse. Mice without seizures were assigned a time of 20 min at
the end of the PTZ challenge observation period. One REST cKO mouse was
excluded from the analysis based on a febrile temperature of 40.68
°C, vs an average temperature of 34.56 ±1.48 °C for all
other mice.

Embryonic mouse cortical neuronal cultures described above were plated
on poly-L-ornithine coated coverslips. Stocks of NBQX, APV(Tocris Bioscience
Cat. No. 0190, 0106, respectively), and kynurenic acid sodium salt (Abcam,
ab146693) were added to Neurobasal media and used in a half-medium change for a
final concentration of 5uM kynurenic acid, 50 μM APV or 2 μM NBQX
at day 10 of culture. After 24 hours, the culture media was aspirated and cells
were fixed by incubation with 4% (v/v) paraformaldehyde in PBS for 20 minutes at
room temperature, and permeabilized with 0.2% Triton X-100 in PBS for 15 minutes
at room temperature. After a wash in PBS, cells were blocked with 4% BSA in PBS
overnight at 4°C. Primary antibodies were diluted to the appropriate
concentration in 4% BSA, and incubated overnight at 4°C. Cells were then
washed 3 times in PBST (PBS with 0.05% Triton) for 10 minutes each, before
adding fluorophore-conjugated secondary antibodies for 2 hours at room
temperature. Fluorophore labeled cells were then washed in PBST, 3×10
minutes, and then mounted using Prolong Gold mounting medium with DAPI and
anti-fade reagent (Invitrogen). Primary antibodies used in Figure 5d are rabbit anti-FoxO1 (Cell Signaling 2880)
and chicken MAP2 (Sigma-Millipore, AB5392). Nuclei were identified by DAPI
labeling, and the cellular distribution of FOXO1 labeling was quantified using
Metamorph software. Cell identification parameters were optimized for scoring
neuronal cultures, and then the same image analysis macro was applied to all
images to generate average FOXO1 cellular intensities in MAP2-positive
neurons.

The N2 Bristol strain was used as the wild-type background for these
studies. C. elegans strains were cultured at 20°C under
standard conditions as described in Brenner 37 . The following mutations and chromosome rearrangements
were used: LGI: spr-4(by105) 38 , spr-4(tm465) 15 ,
daf-16(mu86 ) 39 , hT2[bli-4(e937) qIs48] (I;III) ,
unc-13(e51) 37 ;
LGIII: daf-2(e1370) 39 eat-4(nj2) 40 ; LGV :
spr-1(ok2144) 41 , sid-1(pk3321) 42 ,
egl -3 (gk238) 43 and LGX spr-3(ok2525) 15 ; EG7215(oxTi334
[ eft-3p :: TdTomato :: h2b :: unc-54
3’UTR + Cbr-unc-119 (+)]). All strains,
except for spr-4(tm465) , were provided by the Caenorhabditis
Genetics Center (CGC), which is funded by the NIH Office of Research
Infrastructure Programs (P40 OD010440). Worms which had not been outcrossed
previously were outcrossed six times before use. See Supplementary Table 19 for a full
listing of strains.

The s pr-5 mutants exhibit transgenerational effects,
including increased defects in DNA double strand break repair and germline
apoptosis 44 as well as
lifespan effects 45 . Although
we have not fully evaluated the transgenerational phenotypes of spr-3 and spr-4 alleles, as a precaution,
all lifespan assays were performed with worms no more than 5 generations removed
from a heterozygote ancestor. To facilitate this, spr-4 alleles
were carried over the hT2 balancer described above, while spr-3 ( ok2525 ) was carried over the
MosTIC 46 insertion oxTi335 , which carries a eft-3::tdTomato::h2b fluorescent fusion construct
integrated in the X chromosome at 4,348,071bp. Since spr-3 is
located on the X chromosome at 4,514,00 bp, this effectively marked wildtype spr-3 , allowing us to maintain heterozygous stocks of our
double and single mutants.

The daf-16::gfp fusion line TJ356, bearing transgene zIs356 [ daf-16p::daf-16a/b ::GFP + rol-6 ], was mildly anesthetized with 0.01% tetramizole and
outcrossed to lab wild-type males twice, and then mated to spr-4(by105);spr-3(ok2525) double mutants. Double mutants
bearing zIs356 were recovered and propagated.

Feeding RNAi experiments were performed at 20 °C as described in
Kamath and Ahringer, 2003 47 . A
feeding clone containing a full length daf-2 cDNA was provided
by Keith Blackwell. A daf-16 RNAi vector was provided by Eric Greer. Control
RNAi was performed by feeding HT115 bacteria carrying the empty pL440 vector. A
list of all RNAi clones used is available in Supplementary Table 20 .

Enhanced neuronal RNAi was achieved as described in Calixto et
al 21 , by using sid-1(pk3321) mutants in which sid-1 (a
dsRNA transporter required for RNAi) is re-expressed solely in neurons via a punc-119 : sid-1 transgene. The animals are
therefore systemically deficient in RNAi in all cell types except neurons, where
RNAi is enhanced by heightened expression of sid-1 .

For transgenic C. elegans experiments, lines were
generated by microinjecting the relevant constructs into the gonads of the
indicated worm strains. Prab-3:: mCherry (pGH8, Addgene: 19359)
or pmyo-2::mCherry (pCFJ90, Addgene 19327): were used as coinjection markers.
Three independent lines that demonstrated reliable transmission of the marker
were propagated as described above for each experiment. Where possible,
non-array segregating worms were also maintained as controls. For the
dCas9::VP64 experiments, a peft-3::dCas9VP64::tbb -2 UTR
construct was cloned using the Wormgate Gateway recombination system into the
pCFJ151 MosSCI destination vector (Cloning, genotyping and plasmids). The EG6699
strain, bearing the ttTi5605 , MosSCI integration site on
chromosome II (at 8.42 MB) was raised on HT115 and microinjected as described in
Frøkjær-Jensen C, et al 48 . Integration was confirmed by
genotyping, as well as the absence of unrescued Unc- progeny. These worms were
then microinjected with a cocktail of 4 sgRNAs (5ng/ul each) generated by nested
overlap PCR (see Cloning, genotyping and plasmids), along with a pGH8 myo-2::mcherry (10ng/ul) as a marker. 3 transgenic lines
from independent injections were selected. For simplicity of presentation, these
are presented as merged data for lifespans and qPCR validation. For the GCaMP
experiment, 2 of the lines were selected for mating and analysis.

The SPR-4::GFP reporter line was generated by microparticle bombardment
using the fusion construct and bombardment protocol provided in Sarov et al.
2012 49 (see Cloning
and Genotyping for additional detail).

To analyze RNA from transgenic lines, 100 worms (24 hours post-L4) of
each strain (including controls) were placed into 1.5 ml M9 buffer. For RNAi
experiments 5 worms per plate were harvested in M9. Worms were washed once in
M9, pelleted by centrifugation, resuspended in 200 μl Trizol, vortexed
for 2 minutes and flash frozen in liquid nitrogen. Worms were then
freeze-cracked by thawing in a 37°C water bath and re-freezing in liquid
nitrogen. This was repeated 2 more times. After the final thaw, 100 μl of
Trizol was added and the tubes were maintained at room temperature for 5
minutes. RNA was then extracted with 140 μl of chloroform, precipitated
with an equal volume of 70% ethanol and transferred to an RNeasy spin column
(Qiagen) and purified. Quantitative RT-PCR was performed directly from isolated
RNA, using 1ng of RNA and the Qiagen One Step qPCR mix. All reactions were
performed in triplicate.The ddCt method was used to analyze qRT-PCR data, and
the dCt values were used for statistical analysis.

Worms were treated for 24 hours with the indicated drugs, and then 150
worms were transferred to 1.5mL liquid NGM (1mM MgCl2, 1mM CaCl2, 200mM KHP04,
50mM NaCl) and washed once to remove bacterial clumps. Worms were transferred in
100ul volumes to a 96 u-shaped well plate, and assayed in the Nemametrix
wMicrotracker ( https://nemametrix.com/product-category/phenotyping-products/wmicrotracker/ )
per manufacturer instructions.

Lifespan and aging experiments were performed at 20°C and on FUDR
unless otherwise noted. For each genotype, 20-35 day 1 worms were transferred to
NGM plates containing 100ug/ml FUDR. Worms were scored for viability every day
or every other day, and transferred to fresh plates between day 10 and day 14.
For daf-2 mutant worms, worms were moved again at day 20-24.
For histamine and ivermectin experiments, where the same plates were used for
the entirety of the lifespan, a wetted towel was placed in the container with
the plates to mitigate evaporative loss of water from the plates. For lifespan
experiments in which untreated worms were transferred to the treatment group
(e.g. day 8 histamine treatment), control worms (+/−) treatment were also
transferred to fresh plates of the same type to control for any lifespan effects
resulting from plate transfer. The presence or absence of FUDR is indicated for
each experiment in Supplementary Table 22

For all lifespans and stress resistance experiments, worms that burst
(interior leaking out through the vulva) or bagged (interior hatching of
progeny) were discarded from the plate and not used in lifespan analysis, along
with animals that crawled off the plate during the course of the assay. Plates
with mold or other contamination were discarded.

For quantification of GFP fluorescence in fixed animals, 25-30 worms
were transferred to an Eppendorf tube containing M9 buffer, washed once in M9
and pelleted. The supernatant was removed and the pellet was frozen in liquid
nitrogen. The day before imaging, worm pellets were thawed in PBS with 4%
paraformaldehyde (ThermoFisher) and fixed for 30 minutes at room temperature
while rocking. The PFA was removed by washing twice with PBS, with .025% Triton
(PBST, to prevent sticking), and the worms were stained with DAPI for 10 minutes
at room temperature. The DAPI was removed with a final wash in PBST, and the
pellet was resuspended in 15ul of ProLong Gold mounting media (Life
Technologies). The worms were transferred, in 12.5ul of mounting media, to a
slide, and gently placed under a coverslip, which was then sealed with clear
nail polish (E.M.S.).

Slides were imaged on an Olympus Fluoview 1000 confocal microscope,
using manufacturer settings for GFP and DAPI (488 and 405 laser, respectively)
within 2 weeks of mounting, and all slides compared with each other were imaged
on the same day, in the same imaging session. Worms were imaged via a 40x
objective with a 2x digital zoom. For every worm, Z-stack image series were
taken at 2 μm step sizes (roughly 13-15 images per series). To quantify
nuclear GFP levels, these Z-stacks were opened in ImageJ (NIH) and flattened
using a maximum intensity Z-stack projection. For pharyngeal nuclei, 3 regions
of interest (ROI) were selected based on DAPI staining of nuclei, on either side
of the pharynx and behind it, encompassing the bulk of the nuclei in that area.
These were then used as the ROIs within which to measure GFP fluorescence, using
the ImageJ intensity measuring tool. Average scores from the ROIs were computed
for each worm. For Extended Data Figure 6b middle panel, Extended Data Figure 7d right panel, and Extended Data Figure 9a right panel, all nuclei located in the middle 3 z planes of the worm were
individually selected using the same ROI/Intensity measuring tools. These nuclei
were then used to calculate an average score per worm.

GCaMP imaging was performed in lines bearing kyIs602 [sra-6::GCaMP3.0, 75 ng/μL+unc-122::GFP,
10 ng/μL], which expresses predominately in the ASH neurons. Worms
were removed from plates and mounted on 7.5% agarose pads in NGM liquid
media (1mM MgCl 2 , 1mM CaCl 2 , 200mM KH 2 P04,
50mM NaCl), mixed 1:1 with .05 micron polystyrene beads (Polysciences, Inc,
cat#: 08691) as described here: http://wbg.wormbook.org/2009/12/01/agarose-immobilization-of-c-elegans/ .
A coverslip was very gently applied and worms were imaged for a maximum of
30 minutes after mounting. Videos of 144 seconds (240 frames, ~.6
frames per second) were recorded on the confocal microscope described above
(FV1000), with the confocal aperture widened to 250 microns to allow lower
excitation intensity and mitigate z-drift. Worms were imaged with factory
GFP settings and the 488 laser set to 2% . Videos were opened and played in
Image J, and excitation events were scored by manually for Figure 4a . Scoring was performed blinded to
genotype.

For analyses of dF/F0 maximum intensity, videos were analyzed using
a custom MATLAB script, which automatically registered and segmented the ASH
neuron and recorded GCaMP fluorescence intensity for each frame. Videos of
tracked neurons were manually reviewed and neurons that were poorly tracked
were excluded from analysis. To normalize the fluorescence intensity per
worm we used dF/F0 which was calculated as (F(t)-F0)/F0 where F(t) is the
fluorescence intensity at time t and F0 represents an estimate of the
baseline fluorescence which was calculated as the 0.2 quantile fluorescence
per worm. dF/F0 max intensity was the maximum dF/F0 over the entire
recording (240 frames). For analysis of nemadipine treated worms and for
worms expressing the HisCL channel (and their controls), ROIs were
hand-drawn because the tracking program failed due to either low signal
intensity (nemadipine treated worms) or the inability to distinguish a
confounding GFP signal (HISCL::GFP worms). Some worms were used in multiple
GCaMP analyses.

The SPR-4::GFP fusion fosmid used in bombardment ( ED Fig 6a , b ;
Clone: 3167840880351681 C09) was provided by the Transgenome consortium (Sarov,
2012) 49 . All primers
used for genotyping can be found in Supplementary Table 22 .

Brain samples were from the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex of 638
individuals spanning the range of cognitive function from cognitively normal
to MCI to AD from the ROS and MAP cohorts. https://www.synapse.org/#!Synapse:syn3219045

Brain samples were from the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex of 602
individuals with Schizophrenia, Bipolar disease, and control individuals
with no neuropsychiatric disorders. https://www.synapse.org/#!Synapse:syn2759792

Brain samples were from the frontal cortex of 146 neurologically
normal Caucasian individuals 11 .

ROSMAP cohort https://www.synapse.org/#!Synapse:syn3388564 .

CommonMind Consortium cohort. https://www.synapse.org/#!Synapse:syn3157743 .

Libraries were prepared using Illumina TruSeq Stranded mRNA sample
preparation kits from 500 ng of purified total RNA according to the
manufacturer’s protocol. The finished dsDNA libraries were quantified
by Qubit fluorometer, Agilent TapeStation 2200, and RT-qPCR using the Kapa
Biosystems library quantification kit according to manufacturer’s
protocols. Uniquely indexed libraries were pooled in equimolar ratios and
sequenced on an Illumina NextSeq 500 with paired-end 75 bp reads by the
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute Molecular Biology Core Facilities.

cDNA was synthesized Clontech SmartSeq v4 reagents from of 2ng RNA,
due to low yields from aged worms. Full length cDNA was fragmented to a mean
size of 150bp with a Covaris M220 ultrasonicator and Illumina libraries were
prepared from 2ng of sheared cDNA using Rubicon Genomics Thruplex DNAseq
reagents according to manufacturer’s protocol. The finished dsDNA
libraries were quantified by Qubit fluorometer, Agilent TapeStation 2200,
and RT-qPCR using the Kapa Biosystems library quantification kit. Uniquely
indexed libraries were pooled in equimolar ratios and sequenced on Illumina
NextSeq500 run with paired-end 75 bp reads at the Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute Molecular Biology Core Facilities. One sequenced sample consisted
of primarily ribosomal RNA and was discarded. This sample was reprocessed
along with two other previously sequenced samples (as quality controls) with
a new library preparation and sequencing. On a principal components plot
these three samples showed no clear batch effect compared to the other
samples so the resequencing of the sample that was problematic in the
original batch was used. The two additional resequenced samples used for
quality control were not used in the analysis.

Samples were excluded if missing cognitive diagnosis (cogdx) or PMI,
if the expression of sex-specific genes did not agree with reported sex, or
if RNA integrity (RIN)<6.5. Of the 638 samples with RNA sequencing we
removed 3 due to missing information, 180 due to low RIN, 1 due to sex
mismatch, and the remaining 1 sample from sequencing batch 7 the samples of
which had a strong batch effect on principal components plots and were
removed due to low RIN. Next we performed outlier analysis (see below), and
removed 10 outliers (3 no cognitive impairment (NCI), 1 mild cognitive
impairment (MCI), 5 AD dementia, 1 other dementia). After quality control,
there were 443 individuals for analysis (150 NCI, 118 MCI, 164 AD dementia,
11 other dementia).

We excluded the 10 outlier samples identified in the original
publication. No other samples were removed. After quality control, of the
602 samples with RNA sequencing, there were 592 individuals for analysis
(279 Control, 258 Schizophrenia, 47 Bipolar, 8 Affective/mood disorder).

No samples were removed due to missing information or incorrect sex.
Next we performed outlier analysis, and removed 2 outliers. After quality
control, there were 144 individuals for analysis.

Outlier analysis was performed for each cohort in an iterative
manner using only genes expressed in the youngold and oldestold groups at
each iteration (see sections “Gene
expression sample groups for human cohorts” and
“ Gene expression normalization and
covariate adjustment ”). For ROSMAP and CommonMind
Consortium cohorts we used edgeR TMM-normalized log(CPM) expression. For
Gibbs cohort we used log2 expression. At each iteration, the sample deemed
to be the strongest outlier was removed, if any, and the process was
iterated until no outliers were detected. Outlier detection was performed
using principal components analysis, agglomerative hierarchical clustering
using the Euclidean distance metric and average linkage criterion, and
pairwise correlation of gene expression per sample. Samples were classified
as outliers if they were isolated on a plot of the first and second
principal components or in the hierarchical clustering tree, and had
relatively low correlation with other samples determined as its mean
pairwise correlation with other samples more than 3 standard deviations
below the mean.

BAM files containing reads aligned to hg19 were obtained from
synapse ( https://www.synapse.org/#!Synapse:syn3388564 ). Reads were
obtained from these BAM files using Picard v1.138 ( http://broadinstitute.github.io/picard/ )
SamToFastq. Reads were aligned to GRCh38 with Ensembl GRCh38.86 gene models
using STAR version 2.5.2b 50 with options --outFilterMismatchNoverLmax 0.04
--outFilterMismatchNmax 999 --alignSJDBoverhangMin 1 --alignSJoverhangMin 8
--outFilterMultimapNmax 20 --outFilterType BySJout --alignIntronMin 20
--alignIntronMax 1000000 --alignMatesGapMax 1000000. Expression levels of
genes were quantified as gene counts using FeatureCounts v1.5.1 51 with options -C -p -B -s 2
-t exon -g gene_id.

Gene counts were obtained from synapse. https://www.synapse.org/#!Synapse:syn3346749

Quality control of sequencing reads was performed with FastQC
( https://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc/ ).
Reads were aligned to the Caenorhabditis elegans WBcel235
genome with Ensembl WBcel235.86 gene models using STAR version 2.5.2b with
options --outFilterMismatchNoverLmax 0.04 --outFilterMismatchNmax 999
--alignSJDBoverhangMin 1 --alignSJoverhangMin 8 --outFilterMultimapNmax 20
--outFilterType BySJout --alignIntronMin 15 --alignIntronMax 1000000
--alignMatesGapMax 1000000. Expression levels of genes were quantified as
gene counts using FeatureCounts v1.5.1 with options -C -p -B -s 2 -t exon -g
gene_id for day 2 and -C -p -B -s 0 -t exon -g gene_id for day 10. Data are
available in the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) under accession number
GSE123146.

ROSMAP was our discovery cohort. Based on hierarchical clustering of
age-associated genes (see section
“Hierarchical clustering to select age group
cutoffs” ) we partitioned NCI individuals into 3 age
groups: youngold (28 individuals, ages ≥70 and ≤80), middleold
(33 individuals, ages >80 and <85), and oldestold (89
individuals, ages 85-101). Individuals with cognitive impairment were
grouped into a separate cognitive impairment group (293 individuals).

CommonMind Consortium was a replication cohort for the ROSMAP
results. We partitioned control individuals into 4 age groups: young (105
individuals, ages ≥17 and ≤60), youngold (96 individuals, ages
≥60 and ≤80), middleold (19 individuals, ages >80 and
<85), oldestold (59 individuals, ages ≥85 and 90+; in this
cohort, age of death greater than 90 years is censored to 90+.) Individuals
with neuropsychiatric illnesses were grouped into a separate group (313
individuals).

Gibbs was a replication cohort for the ROSMAP results. We
partitioned cognitively normal individuals into 4 age groups: young (104
individuals, ages ≥15 and <55), youngold (18 individuals, ages
≥55 and ≤80), middleold (3 individuals, ages >80 and
<85), and oldestold (19 individuals, ages 85-101).

Throughout the paper, “individuals with extended
longevity” refers to individuals in the oldestold groups defined
above.

There were 4 genotypes of worms: daf-2 , daf-2; spr-4;3 , N2, and spr-4;3 , and
each genotype had 3 biological replicates. Each genotype was considered as a
separate group for analysis.

Gene counts were input to edgeR 52 . Genes were deemed expressed if ≥10
individuals in a combined youngold and oldestold group had ≥ 1 counts
per million (CPM). Genes not satisfying these criteria were removed keeping
the original library sizes. These were expressed genes used during each
iteration of outlier analysis. After outlier analysis, of 58051 annotated
genes this filtering retained 18511 expressed genes for analyses involving
the ROSMAP cohort. Counts were then normalized using the TMM method in
edgeR. Finally, log(CPM) values were calculated for analyses other than
differential expression.

To adjust gene expression for covariates we fit the linear
regression model for each gene separately using lm() in R: gene expression
~ group + covariates where gene expression is log(CPM), and using the
group and covariates for ROSMAP. For ROSMAP group was a factor with 4
levels: youngold, middleold, oldestold, and cognitivedecline with
cognitivedecline as the reference level. The covariates were sex (factor, 2
levels), RIN (continuous), RIN^2 (continuous), PMI (continuous), and
sequencing batch (factor, 8 levels). The final normalized and adjusted gene
expression values were derived from adding the regression residuals to the
estimated effect of the group level to preserve the effect of the group on
expression. These normalized and adjusted gene expression values were used
to perform gene-gene regression analysis, gene-gene group regression
analysis, and visualize gene expression.

Gene counts were input to edgeR. Genes were deemed expressed if
≥10 individuals in a combined youngold and oldestold group had
≥ 1 counts per million (CPM). Genes that did not satisfy these
criteria were removed maintaining the original library sizes. These were
expressed genes used during each iteration of outlier analysis. After
outlier analysis, of 56632 annotated genes, this filtering retained 19453
expressed genes for analyses involving the CommonMind Consortium cohort.
Counts were then normalized using the TMM method in edgeR. Finally, log(CPM)
values were calculated for analyses other than differential expression. To
adjust gene expression for covariates we fit the linear regression model for
each gene separately using lm() in R: gene expression ~ group +
covariates where gene expression is log(CPM), and using the group and
covariates for CommonMind Consortium. For CommonMind Consortium group was a
factor with 5 levels: young, youngold, middleold, oldestold, and
neuropsychiatric illness with neuropsychiatric illness as the reference
level. The covariates used were selected from those used in the original
publication: sex (factor, 2 levels), RIN (continuous), RIN^2 (continuous),
PMI (continuous), clustered batch (factor, 9 levels), and Institute (factor,
3 levels). The final normalized and adjusted gene expression values were
derived from adding the regression residuals to the estimated effect of the
group level to preserve the effect of the group on expression. These
normalized and adjusted gene expression values were used to perform
gene-gene regression analysis, gene-gene group regression analysis, and
visualize gene expression.

Gene expression data measured on the Illumina humanRef-8 v2.0
expression beadchip platform was downloaded from NCBI GEO GSE15745. Raw
intensity values for each probe were transformed using the rank invariant
normalization method by the authors 11 , and then log2 transformed for analysis. Probes
were deemed expressed if ≥10 individuals in a combined youngold and
oldestold group had Detection P-value<0.01. Unmapped probes according
to updated GPL annotation were removed. These were expressed probes used
during each iteration of outlier analysis. After outlier analysis, of 22184
probes this filtering retained 13239 expressed probes for analyses involving
the Gibbs cohort.

To adjust gene expression for covariates we fit the linear
regression model for each gene separately using lm() in R: probe expression
~ group + covariates where probe expression is log2 expression, and
using the group and covariates for Gibbs. For Gibbs group was a factor with
4 levels: young, youngold, middleold, and oldestold with young as the
reference level. The covariates were sex (factor, 2 levels), PMI
(continuous), and prep hybridization batch (factor, 7 levels). The final
normalized and adjusted probe expression values were derived from adding the
regression residuals to the estimated effect of the group level to preserve
the effect of the group on expression. These normalized and adjusted probe
expression values were used to visualize probe expression.

Gene counts were input to edgeR. Genes were deemed expressed if
≥3 samples had ≥ 1 counts per million (CPM). Genes not
satisfying these criteria were removed keeping the original library sizes.
Of 46739 annotated genes this filtering retained 12981 expressed genes for
analyses involving C. elegans day 2 and 15154 expressed
genes for analyses involving C. elegans day 10. Counts were
then normalized using the TMM method in edgeR. Finally, log(CPM) values were
calculated for analyses other than differential expression. For day 2
covariate adjustment was not necessary because there were no other
covariates beyond the group variable. For day 10 we did not include a batch
covariate because there was no observed batch effect on a principal
components plot, and results were similar if a batch covariate was included
and the two dropped technical repeat sequencings were used instead of their
original sequenced reads (data not shown). Thus, covariate adjustment was
not necessary because there were no other covariates beyond the group
variable. These normalized gene expression values were used to visualize
gene expression.

To visualize differentially expressed genes in heat maps, normalized
gene expression values were transformed to a z-score per gene and
thresholded to [−3, 3].

Differential expression analysis between the oldestold and youngold
groups with covariate adjustment using the covariates listed in section “Gene expression normalization
and covariate adjustment: ROSMAP” was performed for
expressed genes using edgeR (estimateDisp, glmFit, and glmLRT with default
arguments) in R. All 443 samples were included to increase statistical power
during covariate modeling. Genes were considered differentially expressed if
Benjamini and Hochberg false discovery rate (FDR) was ≤0.1, which was
calculated using the R function p.adjust with argument
method=”fdr” 53 .

Differential expression analysis between the oldestold and youngold
groups with covariate adjustment using the covariates listed in section “Gene expression normalization
and covariate adjustment: CommonMind Consortium” was
performed for expressed genes using edgeR (estimateDisp, glmFit, and glmLRT
with default arguments) in R. All 592 samples were included to increase
statistical power during covariate modeling. Genes were considered
differentially expressed if FDR≤0.05 and absolute value of the fold
change ≥ 1.2.

Differential expression analysis between the oldestold and youngold
groups with covariate adjustment using the covariates listed in section “Gene expression normalization
and covariate adjustment: Gibbs” was performed for
expressed probes using linear regression models in limma (lmFit and eBayes
with default arguments) in R. All 144 samples were included to increase
statistical power during covariate modeling. Probes were considered
differentially expressed if FDR≤0.05.

Differential expression analysis between all pairs of groups such as spr-4;3;daf-2 vs daf-2 was performed
for expressed genes using edgeR (estimateDisp, glmFit, and glmLRT with
default arguments) in R. All 12 samples were included during edgeR analysis.
Genes were considered differentially expressed if FDR≤0.05.

Gene annotation and gene sets used for functional gene classification
into biological process (BP), molecular function (MF), and cellular component
(CC) were from the GRCh38.p7 database downloaded from Ensembl Biomart on
November 2, 2016.

Synaptic transmission genes were genes that had direct or indirect
annotation of GO Biological Process “chemical synaptic
transmission” GO:0007268.

REST target genes. The REST RE1 motif position-specific weight matrix
MA0138.2 was obtained from JASPAR 54 . FIMO version 4.10.1 55 was used with the Homo sapiens genome sequence GRCh38
to predict REST binding sites. A gene was defined to be a REST target if it had
an RE1 motif with motif P-value < 1e-7 that was +/−10kb from the
transcription start site of any transcript of the gene in the Ensembl GRCh38.86
gene models. This procedure identified 2632 REST target genes before filtering
for expressed genes in each cohort during gene set enrichment analysis.

ENCODE ChIP-seq transcription factor target gene sets were from the
ENCODE_TF_ChIP-seq_2015 database 56 downloaded from http://amp.pharm.mssm.edu/Enrichr/ on March 8, 2018.

Cell type analysis gene sets were derived from a transcriptome database
of the major cell classes of the mouse cerebral cortex 57 using data from https://web.stanford.edu/group/barres_lab/brain_rnaseq.html . To
select cell marker genes first we calculated the fold expression of each gene in
each cell type by dividing the FPKM expression in that cell type by the mean of
the FPKM expression in the other 6 cell types. For each cell type we selected as
cell marker genes those that had at least 10-fold higher expression and that had
one-to-one human-mouse homologs. Homologs were downloaded from http://www.informatics.jax.org/downloads/reports/HOM_MouseHumanSequence.rpt on November 16, 2016.

DAF-16 class I (upregulated) genes were derived by selecting genes with
FDR<0.01 and class=”up” from Tepper et al Table S1 58 .

For gene set enrichment analysis of differentially expressed genes, we
only retained genes in each gene set that were expressed in that differential
expression analysis. Gene set enrichment analysis was performed separately for
upregulated genes vs not upregulated genes, downregulated genes vs not
downregulated genes, and differentially regulated genes vs not differentially
regulated genes. For Gene Ontology gene sets, gene set enrichment was determined
using the topGO R package 59 using the classic algorithm and Fisher’s statistic. Gene set enrichment
for REST target genes, ENCODE ChIP-seq transcription factor target gene sets,
and Cell type analysis gene sets was performed using the hypergeometric
distribution (one-tailed). Gene sets with less than 5 genes after filtering for
expressed genes were removed before the gene set enrichment false discovery
rates were calculated.

To calculate the statistics for overlap of daf-2 upregulated genes, spr-4;3;daf-2 upregulated genes, spr-4;3;daf-2 downregulated genes, and daf-16 class I genes
for C. elegans day 10 we used the SuperExactTest version 1.0.0
R package 60 .

For meta-analysis of GO terms and ENCODE ChIP-seq transcription factor
target gene set enrichment from the ROSMAP, CMC, and Gibbs cohorts, we used
Stouffer’s method with weights 61 for combining p-values implemented in the sumz function
in the metap R package 62 .
P-values equal to 1 were replaced with 0.999999 to comply with the requirement
that 0<P-value<1. For study weights we used the square root of the
total number of individuals in the combined youngold and oldestold group for
each study (ROSMAP, sqrt(117); CMC, sqrt(155); Gibbs, sqrt(37) 63 .

Normalized and adjusted gene expression values were derived as described
in the section “Gene expression
normalization and covariate adjustment” with the following
changes. First, the group variable was a factor with levels cogdx1, cogdx2,
cogdx3, cogdx4, cogdx5, and cogdx6 (ROSMAP); control, Schizophrena, Bipolar,
Affective (CommonMind Consortium); or not included (Gibbs). Next, genes were
deemed expressed if ≥10 individuals in the cognitively normal group
(ROSMAP, cogdx1; CommonMind Consortium, control with age>=60) had
≥ 1 counts per million (CPM). Genes not satisfying these criteria were
removed keeping the original library sizes. For the Gibbs cohort, probes were
deemed expressed if ≥10 individuals with age>=55 had Detection
P-value<0.01 and no samples had NA values. Probes not satisfying these
criteria were removed. These were expressed genes used for analysis. This
filtering retained: ROSMAP, 18734 expressed genes; CommonMind Consortium, 19615
expressed genes; Gibbs, 13411 expressed probes. For RNA-seq data, counts were
then normalized using the TMM method in edgeR, and log(CPM) values were
calculated for expression. Finally, age was included as a continuous covariate,
and the effects of group and age were added back to the residuals. Then
cognitively normal aged individuals were selected in each cohort (ROSMAP,
cogdx1; CommonMind Consortium, control with age≥60; Gibbs, age
≥55). To determine age-associated genes, the expression of each expressed
gene was correlated with the age of death of the individual using spearman
correlation. Genes with spearman rank correlation FDR<0.1 (ROSMAP, n=1025
genes) or FDR<0.05 (CommonMind Consortium, n=6828 genes; Gibbs, n=203
probes) were age-associated genes. Permuting sample ages before calculating the
spearman correlations gave no genes passing the FDR threshold. Genes were then
normalized to have mean 0 and standard deviation 1 across individuals, and genes
with normalized expression >=3 or <=−3 were set to 3 or
−3, respectively. The Pearson correlation coefficient between individuals
was then calculated using only age-associated genes.

Agglomerative hierarchical clustering using the Euclidean distance
metric and average linkage criterion was performed on the matrix of pair-wise
Pearson correlations to cluster individuals. The resulting tree was cut into 3
groups, and the distribution of the age of death of individuals of each group
was analyzed. Using the ROSMAP cohort, for the cluster with the smallest median
age, with c1 individuals, we calculated the number of individuals, nyoc, with
age of death in [70, youb], of nyo total, and for the cluster with the largest
median age, of c2 individuals, we calculated the number of individuals, nooc,
with age of death in [oolb, Inf), of noo total, as the age boundaries youb and
oolb varied. For each set of age cutoffs we assigned a score as (nyoc/nyo*c1 +
nooc/noo*c2)/(c1+c2). To ensure adequate sample sizes for differential
expression and because individuals with older ages appeared more heterogeneous
in the cluster heat map we only considered age cutoffs with at least 25
individuals in the youngold group and at least 75 individuals in oldestold
group. Based on the top scoring age cutoffs in the ROSMAP cohort, we selected
youb=80 and oolb=85. Thus, the age cutoffs for defining the youngold, middleold,
and oldestold groups used for differential expression in the ROSMAP, CommonMind
Consortium, and Gibbs cohorts were selected to be ≤80, >80 and
<85, and ≥85, respectively.

Statistical analysis was performed using R. Statistical tests used are
noted in the figure legends or in the relevant Methods section . Throughout the paper, all tests are two-sided and
unpaired unless stated otherwise. A significance level of 0.05 was used to
reject the null hypothesis unless stated otherwise.

Boxplots throughout the paper show the median, lower and upper hinges
(first and third quartiles), upper whisker (hinge to the largest value no
further than 1.5 * IQR from the hinge), lower whisker (hinge to the smallest
value at most 1.5 * IQR of the hinge), and outlying points beyond the whiskers.
Additionally, all points are plotted on top of the boxplot and randomly jittered
horizontally

A t-test was used for parametric comparisons between two groups with
normally distributed data, and utilized t.test(). For groups with equal variance
Student’s t-test was used (argument var.equal=TRUE); otherwise
Welch’s t-test was used (argument var.equal=FALSE). ANOVA was used for
parametric comparisons between more than two groups and used aov(). The
Mann–Whitney U test was used for nonparametric comparisons between two
groups without knowledge of their distribution and used wilcox.test() with
arguments exact=TRUE, correct=FALSE. Levene’s test was used to
investigate the homogeneity of variance across groups and used leveneTest() from
the “car” R package. Q-Q plots and the Shapiro-Wilk test were used
to assess normality and used shapiro.test(). The Bonferroni outlier test was
used to assess outliers and used outlierTest() from the “car” R
package. The log-rank test was used to compare the survival distributions of two
groups. Survival statistics were calculated using survfit() with argument
type=“kaplan-meier” and survdiff(). To determine if there was a
linear relationship between two variables we fit a linear regression model and
tested the null hypothesis that the slope of the regression line is 0 using a
two-sided t-test using lm(). P-values were corrected for multiple comparisons
where noted using p.adjust() with argument method=”fdr”,
“holm”, or “bonferroni” for false discovery rate,
Holm’s method, or Bonferroni correction, respectively. The GCaMP imaging
data indicated that nonparametric analyses were most appropriate and thus were
used for all GCaMP analyses. In Fig 2e the
presence of candidate outliers and/or potential non-normality for timepoints
1-12.5 minutes suggested a Mann–Whitney U test was more appropriate
although a t-test produced similar conclusions. Meta-analysis of lifespan
experiments that performed pairwise comparisons among more than 2 groups ( Extended Data Fig. 8a right, Extended Data Fig. 8c ) used pairwise Student’s
t-tests implemented in pairwise.t.test() with argument pool.sd=TRUE to calculate
a common standard deviation used for all groups and comparisons.

## Extended Data
a-c , Adjusted gene expression profiles for
age-associated genes were compared between cognitively normal aged
individuals to derive a matrix of Pearson correlation coefficients that
indicate the degree of similarity between any two cases in the ROSMAP (a,
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, n=150 individuals) CommonMind Consortium (b,
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, n=174 individuals) and Gibbs (c, frontal
cortex, n=40 individuals) cohorts. d-f , Most significantly
enriched GO terms for upregulated genes in the cortex of cognitively normal
individuals who lived to be ≥85 years old relative to individuals who
lived to be ≤80 years old in the ROSMAP (d, n=117 individuals),
CommonMind Consortium (e, n=155 individuals), and Gibbs (f, n=37
individuals) cohorts. P-values were calculated using Fisher’s exact
test (see Methods ). g ,
Meta-analysis of GO term enrichment for downregulated genes. Shown are
selected GO terms related to excitatory and inhibitory synaptic
transmission. The individual cohort enrichment p-values were combined using
Stouffer’s method (see Methods ).
NS, FDR>0.1.

a, Worms were transferred at day 8 to either standard
NGM plates or plates containing ivermectin (1 pg/ml) or nemadipine (2
μM). Shown is a representative curve of an experiment repeated twice.
Nemadipine versus WT: P=3.2 e-4; Ivermectin versus WT: P=2.2e-7 by log-rank
test. Nemadipine, n=81; Ivermectin, n=82; WT, n=76. b. Day 2
worms treated with nemadipine or ivermectin for 24 hours were transferred to
liquid culture and thrashing rate was assessed using the Nemametrix
wMicrotracker (see Methods ). Shown are
mean motility scores for the first 60 minutes, ± S.E.M.. Untreated,
n=17 wells; Ivermectin, n=17 wells; Nemadipine, n=16 wells. Each well
contained ~10 worms. **P=1.7e-4 vs untreated, Mann–Whitney U
test with multiple testing correction by Holm’s method. Results are
representative of an experiment replicated twice.

a-h. C. elegans lines expressing the transgenic HisCl1 channel
in the indicated neuronal populations were treated with 10 mM histamine
(His+) starting at adult day 1 (a, c, e, g) or day 8 (b, d, f, h) and
compared to untreated controls (His−). P-values are by log-rank. See Supplementary Table
22 for individual n values and statistics. i, Shown
is the mean lifespan extension ± S.E.M. for worms treated with
histamine at days 1 or 8 relative to untreated controls for at least three
independent replicates, *P<0.05, **P<0.01 by Student’s t -test. HisCl1was driven using the GAL4SK:VP64 system
for the GABAergic (GABA), glutamatergic (GLUT) and cholinergic systems,
using unc-47 , eat-4 , and unc-17 drivers, respectively (see Supplementary Table 19 for
details). j, Reduced ASH neuron excitation following inhibition
of GABA activity at day 1 but not day 8. Shown is normalized maximum GCaMP
fluorescence in day 1 and 8 unc-47 :HisCl1 worms that were
treated with 10 mM histamine [His (+)] on the indicated day, or untreated
controls [His (−)]. Day 1 His(−): n=18 worms; Day 1 His(+),
n=19 worms; Day 8 His(−): n=23 worms; Day 8 His(+): n=20 worms.
*P=1.1e-3 by the Mann–Whitney U test.

a, Increased excitation of ASH neurons following RNAi
against the GABA vesicular transporter unc-47 . GCaMP
imaging was performed on worms with enhanced neuronal RNAi (See Figure 3 legend and Methods for details) for unc-47 (n=37)
or controls (n=43) at day 2. **P= 6.8e-3 by the Mann–Whitney U test. b, RNAi for unc-47 reduces lifespan. Worms
with enhanced neuronal RNAi were treated with unc-47 (n=31)
or control RNAi (n=84). Shown is a representative lifespan analysis
replicated 3 times. P= 1.3e-6 by log-rank test. c, Reduction of
synaptic neurotransmission or neuropeptide signaling extend lifespan in C. elegans . Mutations in genes affecting glutamatergic
neurotransmission ( eat-4 ), presynaptic function
( unc-13 ) and neuropeptide signaling
( egl-3) exhibit comparable lifespan extension. WT,
n=57; eat-4 ( nj2 ), n=54. P≤2.2e-16; unc-13 ( e51 ), n=92, P=3.6e-14; egl-3 ( gk238 ), n=35, P=8.3e-11 by
log-rank test. Shown are curves representative of two independent
replicates. d, Extension of lifespan by egl-3 RNAi in worms with enhanced neuronal RNAi. Shown are lifespan curves
representative of two independent replicates. egl-3 RNAi
(n=47 worms); Empty Vector (n=84 worms). P=3.5e-11 by the log-rank test.

a-b, Expression of genes downregulated in individuals
≥85 years versus ≤80 years old is inversely related to REST
mRNA levels. Shown is linear regression analysis of normalized and adjusted
REST mRNA levels and mean expression of a, all downregulated
genes and b, downregulated genes associated with the synaptic
transmission GO term. Data is from the CommonMind cohort. Each point
represents an individual case, n=155 individuals. P-values were derived by a
t-test for the slope of the regression line. Note similarity to the data for
the ROSMAP cohort in Fig. 2a , b . c-d, Stratification by
age group. Analysis of the ROSMAP cohort (c, n=117 individuals) and the
CommonMind cohort (d, n=155 individuals) as in Fig 2a , but stratified by age group. P-values were derived by
t-test for the slope of the regression line. e, Loss of REST
expression in conditional REST knockout mice. Representative images of the
cortex (top panel) and hippocampus (bottom panel) from REST lx/lx (Control) , and Nestin-Cre;REST lx/lx (REST−/−) mice. Immunolabeling was performed with the
anti-mouse REST-14 antibody directed against the REST C-terminal domain.
Scale bar, 40 μm. Image shown is representative of an experiment
replicated 4 times. f, Survival of REST −/− and
control mice following administration of the seizure-inducing agent
pentylentetrazole (PTZ, 40 mg/kg). P=0.065 for REST−/− versus
control by the log-rank test. Control, n=9; REST−/−, n=7.

a, spr-4 mRNA levels in worms expressing a stably integrated
dCas9::VP64 transgene in the presence, sgRNA(+), or absence sgRNA(−),
of 4 different sgRNAs targeting the spr-4 promoter.
Transcript levels were determined by qRT-PCR and normalized to
sgRNA(−) controls. Values are the mean ± S.E.M., n=3. A: *P=
0.041; B: P=0.020 by one-sided Student’s t -test. b, dCas9::VP64-mediated elevation of SPR-4 protein levels.
Left panel: Representative images of the head region of heterozygous F1
progeny of the strains bearing a pspr-4::spr-4::gfp::spr-4utr transgene. Arrowheads
indicate SPR-4::GFP positive nuclei. Dashed red lines indicate the outline
of the worm body. Scale bar, 40 μm. Middle panel: Values represent
the mean ± S.E.M. sgRNA(−), n=5 worms; sgRNA(+), n=5 worms
with 7-38 measurements per worm; *P=0.022, one-sided Student’s
t-test. Right panel: Values represent the mean ± S.E.M.
sgRNA(−), n=4 worms; sgRNA(+), n=4 worms. P=0.011, one-sided
Student’s t-test. Shown is a representative experiment replicated
three times. c, Extended lifespan in worms expressing an
integrated dCas9::VP64 transgene and sgRNAs targeting the spr-4 promoter [sgRNA(+)] (n=79 worms) relative to
dCas9::VP64-expressing worms in the absence of sgRNAs [sgRNA (−)]
(n=57 worms) P=5.5e-9, log-rank test. Representative of an experiment
replicated 6 times. d , Lifespans of worms expressing sgRNA
targeting the spr-4 promoter in the presence (n=87 worms)
or absence (n=58 worms) of dCas9::VP64. P=3.7e-7, log-rank test.
Representative of an experiment replicated twice. e, Lifespans
of dCas9::VP64 expressing worms in the presence (n=51 worms) or absence
(n=58 worms) of sgRNAs on the spr-4(tm465) loss-of-function
mutant background. P=0.49, log-rank test. Representative of three
independent replicates. f, Overexpression of spr-4 reduces neural excitation. GCaMP imaging was
performed in ASH neurons in SPR-4 overexpressing (sgRNA+) and control
(sgRNA-) worms in the lines described in c . Shown are maximum
GCaMP fluorescence changes. sgRNA minus, n=12 worms; sgRNA plus, n=10 worms.
*P=0.025, Mann–Whitney U test.

a, Lifespan extension by overexpression of spr-4 is daf-16 dependent. Lifespans
of worms overexpressing spr-4 (sgRNA+;dCAS9::VP64) or not
overexpressing spr -4 (sgRNA-;dCAS9::VP64) following
treatment with daf-16 RNAi or an empty vector control.
sgRNA(+)EV (n=29 worms) versus sgRNA(−)EV (n=25 worms): P=2.7e-4;
sgRNA(+) daf-16 (n=18 worms) versus
sgRNA(−) daf-16 (n=29 worms) P=0.20 by log-rank
test. Representative of 4 independent replicates. b, c, Lifespan extension by the neural excitation inhibitors ivermectin and
nemadipine is daf-16 -dependent. Shown are lifespan
determinations for WT control and daf-16 ( mu86 ) mutant worms in the
presence or absence of nemadipine (2μM) ( b ) or
ivermectin (1pg/ml) ( c ). b, WT, n=69 worms;
WT+Nema, n=51; daf-16 , n=43; daf-16 +Nema,
n=67. WT+Nema vs WT, P=9.9e-8; daf-16+Nema vs daf-16, P=0.014 by log-rank
test c, WT, n=78 worms; WT+Ive, n=77; daf-16 ,
n=27; daf-16 +Ive, n=29. WT+Ive vs WT, P=7.3e-8; daf-16 +Ive vs daf-16 , P=0.22; log-rank
test. Curves are representative of an experiment replicated 2 (nemadipine)
or 3 (ivermectin) times. d, Inhibition of neural excitation
with ivermectin elevates DAF-16 levels. Worms expressing a DAF-16::GFP
transgene were treated for 10 days with 1 pg/mL ivermectin and assessed by
confocal microscopy. Left panel: Shown is total DAF-16::GFP. Values
represent the mean ± S.E.M (untreated, n=19 worms, Ivermectin, n=16
worms). **P=2.5e-7, Mann-Whitney U test. Right panel: Shown is nuclear
DAF-16::GFP (n=5 worms per group, 50-61 nuclei per worm). *P= 0.013 by
Student’s t-test. Results are representative of an experiment
replicated twice. e, DAF-16 is not required for inhibition of
neural excitation by nemadipine. Shown are maximum ASH GCaMP intensity
changes for day 2 daf-16 ( mu86 ) mutant
worms treated for 24 hours with 2 μM nemadipine (untreated, n=16
worms; nemadipine, n=18 worms). P=9.4e-5, Mann-Whitney U test). f, DAF-16 is not required for inhibition of neural
excitation by ivermectin. Shown are day 2 worms treated for 24 hours with 1
pg/mL ivermectin (control, n=19 worms; ivermectin, n=32 worms). P=0.030,
Mann-Whitney U test).

a , Loss of function of SPR-3 and SPR-4 reduces the
lifespan extension of daf-2 RNAi. Left panel:
Representative lifespan analysis of spr-4(by105);spr-3(ok2525) double mutant and wild-type
(WT) worms following daf-2 or empty vector (EV) control
RNAi. WT+EV, n=54 worms; spr-4;3 +EV, n=58 worms;
WT+ daf-2 , n=26 worms; spr-4;3 + daf-2 , n=54 worms. Right
panel: Values represent mean percent lifespan extension ± S.E.M.
( daf-2 RNAi versus EV control) in the indicated
genotypes. WT, n=6 independent experiments; spr-4 ( by105 ), n=3, *P=0.017 versus WT; spr-4 ( tm465 ), n=4, **P=0.0062 versus
WT; spr-3 ( ok2525 ), n=4, **P=0.0018 versus
WT; spr-4 ( by105 ); spr-3 ( ok2525 ),
n=4, **P=0.0016 versus WT by Students t -test. See Supplementary Table
22 for individual lifespan data and statistics. b, Lifespan is unaffected by spr-4 and spr-3 mutations in a wild-type background. WT, n=50 worms; spr-3 ( ok2525 ), n=31; spr-4 ( by105 ); spr-3 ( ok2525 ),
n=32; spr-4 ( by105 ), n=34; spr-4 ( tm465 ), n=33.There were no
reproducibly significant changes by the log-rank test in 3-6 independent
experiments per genotype (see Supplementary Table 22 ). c, Quantification of lifespan extension in daf-2 mutant worms shown in Fig. 3b attributable to neuronal expression of spr-3 and spr -4. RNAi was targeted to
neurons by neuronal expression of a sid -1 transgene in
otherwise sid-1 null daf-2(1370) mutants
( daf-2 ;p[neuron]: sid-1 ), and compared
with untargeted RNAi in sid-1 wild-type daf-2(1370) mutants ( daf-2 ). Values
represent mean lifespan extension relative to the control sid-1 ( pk3321 );p[neuron]: sid-1 worms treated with empty vector (EV) ± S.E.M (n= 3 independent
experiments). Significant lifespan effects were not observed for RNAi in the
absence of the daf-2 mutation. *P<0.05;
**P<0.01 by Student’s t -test. d, Gene expression determined by RNA sequencing in day 2 adult worms.
Differentially expressed genes (rows) and the indicated worm genotypes
(columns) were clustered, and gene expression, transformed to a z-score per
gene, is represented in a heat map. N=3 independent replicates per genotype. e , Venn diagram illustrating the overlap of differentially
expressed genes in daf-2 single mutant vs WT and spr-4;3;daf-2 triple mutant vs daf-2 single mutant comparisons. P=7e-30, Fisher’s exact test with a
one-sided alternative hypothesis. . f, Long-lived daf-2 mutants do not show an age-related increase in
neural excitation. Shown is maximum ASH GCaMP intensity changes in day1-2
(n=39) and day 14-16 (n=20) daf-2(e1370) mutant worms. Note
the absence of the age-related increase in excitation observed in wild-type
aging worms ( Fig. 1e ). P=0.93,
Mann-Whitney U test. g , The spr-4;spr-3 double
mutant in a wild-type background does not significantly affect neural
excitation in ASH neurons. WT, n=15 worms; spr-4;spr-3 ,
n=15 worms. P= 0.62, Mann-Whitney U test. h, DAF-16 does not
mediate suppression of neural excitation in the daf-2 mutant. RNAi for daf-16 was performed in daf-2(e1370) mutant worms on a sid-1 ( pk3321 );p[neuron]: sid-1 background to augment RNAi in neurons ( daf-16 RNAi, n=20
worms, empty vector (EV) control, n=12 worms). P=0.33, Mann–Whitney U
test. i, Description of the genes targeted by RNAi in Figure 4d .

a, Reduced DAF-16 activation in spr-4;3 mutants following daf-2 RNAi.
Left confocal panel: Shown are day 10 worms of the indicated genotypes
expressing an integrated DAF-16::GFP transgene and treated with daf-2 RNAi or empty vector (EV) control since day 1 of
adulthood. Images are maximum intensity z-projections. Scale bar,
40μm. Left bar graph: Values represent mean GFP intensity ±
S.E.M. in the peri-pharyngeal regions of spr-4;3 double
mutants relative to wild-type controls for a representative experiment
replicated 4 times (see methods for
details of analysis). (n=8-12 worms per replicate). **P=5.2e-5 by
Welch’s t-test. Right confocal panel: Higher magnification views of
DAF-16::GFP and DAPI-labeled nuclei. Images are magnified confocal z-planes.
Scale bar, 10μm. Right bar graph: Values represent mean nuclear GFP
intensity ± S.E.M. relative to the WT-EV control, n=5 worms per
genotype and 51-89 nuclei per worm. *P=0.016, **P=5.5e-3 by ANOVA with
post-hoc Tukey test. Values and images are representative of an experiment
replicated 3 times. b, Gene expression determined by RNA
sequencing in adult day 10 worms. Differentially expressed genes (rows) and
replicates of the indicated worm genotypes (columns) were clustered, and
gene expression, transformed to a z-score per gene, is represented in a heat
map. n=3 independent replicates per genotype. c , Venn diagram
illustrating the overlap of differentially expressed genes in day 10 daf-2 vs WT and spr-4;3;daf-2 vs daf-2 comparisons. P=4e-123, Fisher’s exact test
with a one-sided alternative hypothesis. d, Overlap of class I daf-16 target genes (described in Methods ) with genes downregulated in day 10 spr-4;3;daf-2 triple mutants relative to daf-2 single mutants. P-values were calculated using a
hypergeometric distribution (see Methods ). n.s, p=0.99 e, Ivermectin increases
DAF-16::GFP levels in spr-4;3 worms following daf-2 RNAi. Left panel: Confocal imaging of GFP
fluorescence in ivermectin-treated (10 pg/ml) and untreated worms. The red
dashed lines indicate the worm body. Right panel: Quantification of
DAF-16::GFP. Values represent mean GFP intensity ± S.E.M.,
WT/Untreated, n=12; WT/Ivermectin, n=10; spr-4; 3/Untreated,
n=10; spr-4; 3/Ivermectin, n=10. **P=4.6e-4
( spr-4;3 vs WT untreated), P=2.6e-4
( spr-4;3 +Ivermectin vs spr-4;3 untreated) by Mann–Whitney U test with multiple testing correction by
Holm’s method. Shown is a representative experiment replicated 3
times.

a, Linear regression analysis of REST and FOXO mRNA
levels in the prefrontal cortex of 174 cognitively-intact individuals
(age≥60 years) from the CommonMind Consortium determined by RNA
sequencing. P-values are derived from a t -test for the
slope of the regression line and Bonferroni-corrected across all expressed
genes. b, Colocalization of REST and FOXO1 in neurons of the
aged human prefrontal cortex. Confocal immunofluorescence microscopy was
performed in human prefrontal cortex using antibodies against REST (green,
rabbit polyclonal; Bethyl), FOXO1 (red, goat polyclonal; LS-Bio) and the
neuronal marker MAP2 (grey, chicken polyclonal; Abcam). Scale bar, 40
μm. The image shown is representative of immunofluorescence labeling
performed in 30 individuals. See Supplementary Table 20 for
additional information on antibodies. c, Inhibition of
glutamatergic signaling in mouse cortical neuronal cultures elevates FOXO1
levels. Left panel: Primary mouse cortical neuronal cultures treated with
kynurenic acid (KYNA, 5 μM), APV (50 μM), NBQX (2 μM)
or vehicle (Control) were analyzed by confocal immunofluorescence for FOXO1
or MAP2 and labeled with DAPI. Boxed areas were magnified in the lower three
rows. Note that most FOXO1 in cultured neurons is cytoplasmic, but a
detectable nuclear component overlaps with DAPI. Scale bar, 40 μm.
Right panel: Quantification of total and nuclear FOXO1 levels in
MAP2-positive neurons. Values represent the mean ± S.E.M. Control,
n=200; KYNA, n=326; APV, n=148; NBQX, n=197. FOXO1 Total/KYNA: **P=2.1e-8;
FOXO1 Nuclear/KYNA **P=1.1e-4; FOXO1 Total/NBQX **P=8.8e-13; FOXO1
nuclear/NBQX **P=5.2e-6 by the Mann–Whitney U test with multiple
testing correction by Holm’s method. Shown is a representative
experiment replicated 3 times.