# Title
Apolipoprotein E and Alzheimer disease: pathobiology and targeting
strategies

# Abstract
Polymorphism in the apolipoprotein E ( APOE ) gene is a
major genetic risk determinant of late-onset Alzheimer disease (AD), with the APOE*ε4 allele conferring an increased risk and the APOE*ε2 allele conferring a decreased risk, relative
to the common APOE*ε3 allele. Strong evidence from
clinical and basic research suggests that a major pathway by which APOE4
increases the risk of AD is by driving earlier and more abundant amyloid
pathology in the brains of APOE*ε4 carriers. The list of
amyloid-β (Aβ)-dependent and Aβ-independent pathways that
are known to be differentially modulated by APOE isoforms is increasing. For
example, evidence is accumulating that APOE influences tau pathology,
tau-mediated neurodegeneration, and microglial responses to AD-related
pathologies. In addition, APOE4 is either pathogenic or shows reduced efficiency
in multiple brain homeostatic pathways, including lipid transport, synaptic
integrity and plasticity, glucose metabolism, and cerebrovascular function.
Here, we review the recent progress in clinical and basic research into the role
of APOE in AD pathogenesis. We also discuss how APOE can be targeted for AD
therapy using a precision medicine approach.

## Introduction
Polymorphism in the apolipoprotein E ( APOE ) gene is a major
risk determinant of late-onset Alzheimer disease (AD), the symptoms of which develop
after the age of 65 years ( Box
1 ) 1 . AD is the
leading cause of dementia in elderly individuals 2 , and its pathological hallmarks include the deposition of
extracellular amyloid-β (Aβ) aggregates as amyloid plaques and
intracellular hyperphosphorylated tau aggregates as neurofibrillary tangles, along
with neuronal loss and glial activation 3 . Given that individuals with late-onset AD account for more than
95% of the total AD population, efforts to elucidate the role of APOE , in particular its links to the pathological hallmarks of
the disease, are relevant to the vast majority of patients with AD seeking new
therapies.

Of the three major APOE allelic variants, ε2,
ε3 and ε4 , APOE*ε4 is associated with an increased risk 4 , 5 and APOE*ε2 is associated with a
decreased risk 6 , 7 of AD relative to the common APOE*ε3 allele. Carrying one APOE*ε4 allele increases the risk of late-onset AD
3–4-fold, and carrying two alleles increases the risk
9–15-fold 6 , 8 , 9 .
Among individuals with AD, APOE*ε4 is also associated with
lower age of disease onset ( Box
1 ) 4 , 10 . Mounting evidence suggests that the APOE4
protein isoform drives amyloid pathology and impairs multiple aspects of normal
brain function, thereby increasing the risk of AD 11 ( Table
1 ). Studies have also shed light on the associations between APOE genotype and tau-mediated neurodegeneration 12 , the risk of dementia with Lewy
bodies (DLB) 13 – 15 , Parkinson disease dementia (PDD) 15 – 18 and the degree of TAR DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP43)
pathology in the brains of individuals with AD 19 – 21 . In
addition, advances in disease modelling and molecular profiling technology have
provided insights into the role of APOE in AD pathogenesis at the molecular,
cellular and organism level.

In light of these findings, in this Review we describe the emerging link
between APOE genotype and pathogenic proteins found in the brains
of individuals with AD. We summarize recent progress in understanding the mechanisms
by which different APOE isoforms contribute to or counteract AD pathogenesis via
Aβ-dependent and Aβ-independent pathways. Finally, we discuss
opportunities and strategies for developing APOE-targeted AD therapies in the
future.

## Biology of APOE
Human APOE is a 34 kDa glycoprotein 22 that is composed of 299 amino acids after cleavage of the
18-amino-acid signal peptide. In the CNS, APOE is abundantly expressed in
astrocytes, microglia, vascular mural cells and choroid plexus cells, and to a
lesser extent in stressed neurons 23 , 24 . Once APOE has
been secreted from the cells, the cell surface ATP-binding cassette transporters
ABCA1 25 and
ABCG1 26 transfer
cholesterol and phospholipids to nascent APOE to form lipoprotein particles. The
size and density of APOE lipoprotein particles in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) are
similar to those of HDL 27 . APOE
plays a critical role in redistributing cholesterol and other lipids to neurons
through binding to cell-surface APOE receptors. The LDL receptor (LDLR) family
members, including LDLR and LDLR-related protein 1 (LRP1), are major APOE receptors
involved in APOE-mediated lipid metabolism. APOE has two main functional regions
( FIG. 1 ): the receptor-binding region in
the amino-terminal domain and the lipid-binding region in the carboxy-terminal
domain 28 , 29 .

Computer-assisted modelling has been performed to examine the conformational
changes in APOE that potentially occur on lipid binding. Structural modelling of
human APOE3 was accomplished using data on APOE from the Protein Data Bank 30 – 37 . The modelling technique has been well documented 38 – 44 and enables composite protein structures to be built from
multiple structural templates. The resulting lipid-free and lipid-bound structures
are shown in FIG. 1 45 – 48 . The structures show that the lipid-binding region (residues
244–272) of APOE interacts directly with the lipid particle. Lipid binding to
APOE increases the accessibility of the receptor-binding region (residues
136–150), thereby enabling cellular lipid delivery. The structural changes to
APOE that are predicted to take place on lipid binding are consistent with those
documented in the existing structural literature for this protein 30 , 31 , 34 , 35 , 37 , 49 – 54 .

The APOE isoforms encoded by the three corresponding gene alleles differ from
one another only at positions 112 and 158 (APOE2: Cys112, Cys158; APOE3: Cys112,
Arg158; APOE4: Arg112, Arg158). However, these single amino acid polymorphisms
substantially alter the structure and function of APOE, thereby modulating its
binding properties with regard to both lipids and receptors. For example, the
binding of APOE2 to LDLR is more than 50 times weaker than the binding of APOE3 or
APOE4 to this receptor 55 . In the
periphery, the relatively low affinity of APOE2 for LDLR impairs the clearance of
triglyceride-rich lipoprotein remnant particles and, as a consequence, APOE2
contributes to the onset of type III hyperlipoproteinaemia 22 , 56 .
By contrast, enhanced binding of APOE4 to VLDL particles, as compared with the other
APOE isoforms 55 , impairs lipolytic
processing of VLDL in the periphery; thus, APOE4 is associated with pro-atherogenic
changes in lipoprotein distribution 56 .

In addition to their role in lipid homeostasis in the periphery, APOE
isoforms differentially modulate multiple pathways in the brain, including lipid
transport, synaptic integrity and plasticity, glucose metabolism and cerebrovascular
function. However, the correlation between the structure of individual APOE isoforms
and their modulation of these pathways in the brain is less clear than for their
actions on peripheral lipid metabolism. Possible mechanisms by which structural
differences between APOE isoforms could modulate these brain pathways include
differences in protein conformation, post-translational modification, lipoprotein
preference and binding affinity for receptors 29 .

Studies have also shed light on the potential role of plasma APOE in brain
homeostasis. Synaptic dysfunction in Apoe -knockout mice can be
partially restored, and cognition improved, by genetic restoration of peripheral
APOE 57 . These effects
occur despite the presence of the blood–brain barrier (BBB), which blocks
APOE influx from the periphery. The relative ratio of APOE4 to APOE3 in plasma
positively correlates with the loss of regional grey matter volume and abnormal
cerebral glucose metabolism in cognitively healthy APOE * ε3/ε4 carriers 58 , linking the isoform composition
of plasma APOE to structural and metabolic changes of the brain. Therefore, plasma
APOE is a potential determinant of brain structure and function.

In APOE*ε3/ ε4 individuals, the APOE4:APOE3
ratio is >1 in the brain and CSF but <1 in the plasma 59 , 60 , suggesting that the metabolic pathways of APOE isoforms
differ between the CNS and plasma. Thus, further studies exploring the similarities
and differences in APOE metabolism between the CNS and periphery, and the functional
crosstalk between brain and plasma APOE, would aid a better understanding of the
impact of APOE isoforms on brain physiology.

## APOE4 and Aβ pathology
Although evidence from clinical and pathological studies shows a link
between APOE genotype and multiple proteinopathies, including those
involving tau, α-synuclein and TDP43, the best-established association is
between APOE genotype and Aβ. Pathological studies of
post-mortem brain tissue from patients with AD have found that APOE*ε4 exacerbates the intra-neuronal accumulation of
Aβ 61 , plaque
deposition in the brain parenchyma 62 – 65 , formation
of neurotoxic Aβ oligomers 66 and the severity of cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA) 67 , 68 . By contrast, APOE*ε2 is associated
with reduced numbers of neuritic plaques 69 but somewhat increased risks of CAA and CAA-related
intracranial haemorrhage 70 – 73 .

Imaging and CSF biomarker studies have shown that APOE*ε4 is consistently associated with greater
Aβ deposition in the brains of cognitively healthy elderly
individuals 74 – 78 , individuals with mild cognitive
impairment (MCI) 79 and individuals
with AD 80 . A longitudinal study
also showed that APOE*ε4 carriers exhibit increased
Aβ deposition in the cortex compared with APOE*ε4 non-carriers 81 . Of note, APOE*ε4 is associated with an increased rate of
longitudinal Aβ accumulation among cognitively healthy individuals who are
amyloid-negative, whereas no differences in rates of Aβ deposition are
observed among amyloid-positive individuals with different APOE genotypes 82 . Assuming that
longitudinal Aβ accumulation represents an early phase of amyloid deposition
in amyloid-negative individuals and a later phase in amyloid-positive individuals,
these results suggest that the effect of APOE*ε4 on
Aβ metabolism and aggregation is most pronounced during the initiation phase
of Aβ deposition. By contrast, in cross-sectional studies, APOE*ε2 was found to be associated with reduced brain
Aβ deposition in cognitively healthy elderly people 77 , 83 , 84 and individuals with MCI 85 , particularly those without an APOE*ε4 allele. APOE*ε2 is also
protective against longitudinal Aβ accumulation, especially among individuals
without amyloid deposition 82 .
Together, multiple layers of evidence indicate that the APOE genotype, in particular the presence of APOE*ε4 , modulates
amyloid pathology in the brain.

The effect of APOE4 in driving amyloid pathology is likely to outweigh the
protective effect of APOE2 ( FIG. 2 , Table 2 ) 85 , as APOE*ε2/ε4 and APOE*ε3/ε4 individuals have comparable
probabilities of exhibiting amyloid-β (Aβ) deposition on an
amyloid-PET scan. In addition, among cognitively healthy individuals and people with
MCI, the prevalence of amyloid pathology is higher in those with APOE*ε2/ε4 than in those with APOE*ε3/ε3 . These findings indicate that APOE4 is
a strong driver of Aβ deposition irrespective of the presence of APOE2 or
APOE3. Importantly, the pattern of estimated probabilities of amyloid positivity
associated with different APOE genotypes is similar to that of AD
risk 6 , 8 , 9 ( Table 2 ), reinforcing the idea that
APOE4 increases the risk of AD largely by causing earlier and more abundant amyloid
pathology in the brain. Likewise, the presence of APOE*ε2 might reduce AD risk by decreasing amyloid pathology, especially in the absence of APOE*ε4 . However, given that APOE*ε2 is associated not only with intact cognition but
also, paradoxically, with increased AD pathology 86 in the oldest old population, the protective effect of APOE*ε2 might also be mediated by Aβ-independent
mechanisms. Supporting this notion, APOE*ε2 is associated
with reduced cognitive decline during ageing even after adjustment for Aβ
pathologies 87 .

As Aβ is continuously generated in the brain as a result of APP
processing, efficient clearance is vital for preventing Aβ accumulation
and subsequent aggregation 88 .
The clearance of soluble Aβ from the brain interstitial fluid (ISF)
occurs in an APOE isoform-dependent manner with APOE4 less efficient than APOE2
or APOE3 89 . In addition,
deficiency of ABCA1, which lipidates APOE, decreases Aβ clearance in
APOE4-targeted replacement (TR) mice, in which murine Apoe is
replaced by a specific allele of human APOE , whereas no such
effect is observed in APOE3-TR mice 90 . Thus, the isoform and lipidation status of APOE is
likely to influence the overall efficiency of Aβ clearance in the brain.
Major pathways by which Aβ is removed from the brain include clearance
through the BBB, cellular uptake and subsequent degradation, enzymatic
degradation, clearance via ISF bulk flow, and CSF absorption into the
circulatory and lymphatic systems 88 . The effects of individual APOE isoforms on each of these
processes ( FIG. 3 ) could contribute in a
synergistic manner to variations in Aβ metabolism rates, in particular
under pathogenic conditions.

The removal of Aβ via transport through the BBB is mediated by
APOE in an isoform-dependent manner. An in vivo study showed that
APOE2–Aβ and APOE3–Aβ complexes were cleared by both
VLDLR and LRP1 at the BBB, whereas APOE4 binding to Aβ switched the
clearance pathway of Aβ at the BBB from LRP1 to the VLDL receptor
(VLDLR) 91 . As VLDLR
mediates the internalization of APOE–Aβ complex at a slower rate
than LRP1, redirection of the clearance pathway for the APOE4–Aβ
complex might contribute to the slower clearance of Aβ at the BBB, when
compared with APOE2–Aβ and APOE3–Aβ
complexes 91 .
Consistent with the findings in vivo, a study utilizing a tissue engineering
approach to generate a 3D model of human brain blood vessels showed that APOE4
was less efficient than APOE2 at promoting Aβ transport across vessel
walls 92 . Furthermore,
an in vitro study showed that clearance of Aβ aggregates by
BBB-associated pericytes was impaired in the presence of astrocyte-derived APOE4
compared with APOE3 93 . The
precise mechanisms by which APOE isoforms interact with Aβ receptors to
mediate Aβ efflux from or influx into the brain require further
investigation.

Cellular uptake and subsequent degradation of Aβ by glial cells
represents a crucial Aβ clearance pathway in the brain. Human
iPSC-derived astrocytes that are homozygous for APOE*ε4 show impaired uptake of Aβ 1–42 in vitro compared with APOE*ε3 -homozygous iPSCs 94 . A study using mouse brain slices
indicated that astrocyte-mediated degradation of Aβ occurs through a
mechanism that is dependent on both APOE and LRP1, suggesting that APOE is
essential for receptor-mediated Aβ uptake by astrocytes 95 . However, another study showed
that downregulation of LDLR reduced Aβ uptake, whereas upregulation of
LDLR enhanced both the uptake and clearance of Aβ in astrocytes,
independently of APOE 96 . A
more recent study showed that the interaction between APOE and Aβ under
physiological conditions is minimal, and that APOE might not be required for the
cellular clearance of Aβ in astrocytes 97 . Instead, APOE competes with Aβ
for the LRP1-dependent cellular uptake pathway, thereby blocking ~50% of
the total Aβ cellular clearance by astrocytes in
vitro 97 .
Therefore, receptor-mediated internalization of Aβ in astrocytes might at
least be partially affected by the presence of different APOE isoforms and APOE
receptors, with APOE4 impairing the uptake of Aβ by these cells.

Cellular uptake and degradation of Aβ by microglia is also
differentially influenced by the various APOE isoforms. Degradation of Aβ
peptides by neprilysin within microglia is markedly facilitated in the presence
of APOE, with APOE4 being less efficient at promoting the degradation of soluble
Aβ than APOE2 and APOE3 98 . In addition, APOE-mediated cholesterol efflux facilitates
the delivery of Aβ to lysosomes and increases the efficiency of
intracellular Aβ degradation in microglia 99 . The clearance of extracellular
Aβ has been found to be impaired in human iPSC-derived microglia-like
cells expressing APOE*ε4 compared with those expressing APOE*ε3 94 .

Studies have also investigated the effects of APOE isoforms on other
clearance pathways, including perivascular drainage and proteolytic degradation
of Aβ by Aβ-degrading proteases (Aβ-DPs). A wide array of
Aβ-DPs, including neprilysin and insulin degrading enzyme (IDE),
determine Aβ levels in the brain 100 . Expression of neprilysin in both brain parenchyma and
vasculature and that of IDE in hippocampus are significantly lower in
post-mortem brains from individuals with at least one copy of APOE*ε4 than in those from individuals without APOE*ε4 101 , 102 . The
perivascular drainage pathway has a major role in ISF bulk-flow clearance of
Aβ 103 . In a
study that examined this pathway, after intracerebral injections of
Aβ 1–40 , aggregation of
Aβ 1–40 in the peri-arterial drainage pathway was
observed in APOE4-TR mice but not in APOE3-TR mice 104 . Thus, the clearance of Aβ
mediated by proteolytic degradation and perivascular drainage pathways seems to
be impaired by the presence of APOE4.

The influence of APOE isoforms on the glymphatic clearance of
Aβ 105 is less
clear. In one study, APOE derived from the choroid plexus and CSF was shown to
be delivered into the brain via the glymphatic fluid transporting system in an
APOE isoform-dependent manner 106 , although the relevance of these findings to disease needs
to be further investigated.

Aβ aggregation occurs when Aβ is over-produced and/or
inefficiently cleared. The formation of Aβ fibrils, a major component of
amyloid plaques, follows three kinetic stages: a lag phase, a growth phase and a
plateau phase 107 . Although
the effects of APOE on the formation of Aβ fibrils are inconsistent in
vitro 29 , 108 , in vivo studies have shown a crucial
role for APOE in the initial seeding stage of Aβ deposition. Through a
novel approach involving conditional expression of different APOE isoforms in a
mouse model of amyloid pathology, astrocytic overexpression of APOE4, but not
APOE3, during the initial Aβ seeding stage was found to exacerbate
amyloid pathology. However, expression of APOE4 or APOE3 during the period of
rapid plaque growth had no effect on Aβ deposition 109 . In another study published in
parallel, reduction of APOE expression by antisense oligonucleotide (ASO)
treatment beginning at postnatal day 0 (Aβ seeding stage) led to a
significant reduction in amyloid pathology in amyloid mouse models that were
homozygous for APOE*ε3 or APOE*ε4 110 . By contrast, ASO treatment beginning at the onset of
amyloid deposition did not change the overall plaque load 110 . These in vivo results
align with the notion that APOE, and in particular APOE4, promotes the formation
of Aβ fibrils by accelerating the initial seeding or nucleation of
Aβ peptides ( FIG. 3 ).

Given that the generation of Aβ peptide from amyloid precursor
protein (APP) represents a pivotal event in AD pathogenesis 111 , researchers have sought to identify
the role of APOE in this process. A study published in 2017 found that HEK293
cell-derived APOE induced APP transcription and Aβ
production in human embryonic stem cell-derived and induced pluripotent stem
cell (iPSC)-derived neurons. The effects were isoform-dependent, with APOE4
stimulating Aβ production more potently than other isoforms 112 . Aβ secretion is
significantly higher in human iPSC-derived neurons carrying APOE*ε4 than in those with APOE*ε3 , probably as a result of increased APP
transcription or processing 94 , 113 . However, transcriptomic
analysis of cortical tissue from APOE-TR mice did not reveal the transcriptional
regulation of App associated with APOE4 114 . Furthermore, in mouse models of
amyloid pathology that expressed human APOE, no APOE isoform-dependent
differences in the amount of APP fragment C99 or β-secretase activity
were observed, suggesting that amyloidogenic processing of APP does not vary in
the presence of different APOE isoforms in vivo 89 . Species-dependent (human
versus mouse) differences in APOE isoform-regulated Aβ
production 113 may
have contributed to these conflicting results.

## APOE in AD pathogenesis: beyond amyloid
APOE allele effects have also been implicated in
proteinopathies characterized by tau, α-synuclein, and TDP43 pathology in the
brains of individuals with AD. In addition, emerging evidence suggests that APOE can
modulate tau-mediated neurodegeneration as well as microglial homeostasis, synaptic
integrity, lipid transport, glucose metabolism and cerebrovascular function ( FIG. 4 ). In this section, we discuss the disease
relevance of these findings within the context of APOE genotype and
its association with the risk of AD.

Findings suggest that APOE alleles exert an effect on
neurodegenerative diseases marked by the aggregation of tau, a
microtubule-associated protein encoded by the MAPT gene 115 . Individuals
with primary tauopathies, such as progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) and
corticobasal degeneration (CBD) 115 , 116 , exhibit
tau but not amyloid pathology. AD, though characterized by extensive tau
pathology, is considered a secondary tauopathy as the tau pathology is
accompanied by earlier development of amyloid pathology. Of note, postmortem
brains from individuals carrying two APOE*ε4 alleles
have more tau aggregates than those carrying either one or no APOE*ε4 alleles when Aβ pathology is
present 65 , but no such
association is observed in brains without Aβ 117 , 118 . Moreover, among patients with PSP, the presence of
concomitant amyloid pathology is associated with an increased likelihood of
carrying APOE*ε4 119 . Thus, APOE*ε4 is likely to be
a risk factor for amyloid pathology but not necessarily for tau burden in
primary tauopathies 119 , 120 . Interestingly, although APOE*ε2 is protective in the setting of AD, in the
absence of amyloid pathology it has been implicated as a risk factor for
tau-related neurodegeneration 121 . A study showed that APOE*ε 2 was
associated with increased risk and greater severity of tau pathology in patients
with PSP 122 . Taken together,
these results indicate that the effects of APOE alleles on
tauopathies are influenced by the presence of amyloid pathology.

The pathological aggregation of tau strongly correlates with patterns of
neurodegeneration and clinical manifestations in AD 123 – 126 . Studies have shown that neuron-specific
overexpression of APOE4 increases tau phosphorylation in mice 127 . Subsequently, Shi et al.
crossed the Tau P301S transgenic mouse model, which overexpresses
human tau containing the frontotemporal dementia-linked Pro301Ser mutation, with
human APOE-TR mice. Tau P301S –APOE4-TR mice developed markedly
more brain atrophy and neuroinflammation than
Tau P301S –APOE2-TR and Tau P301S –APOE3-TR mice
at 9 months of age 12 . By
contrast, Zhao et al. introduced tau with another frontotemporal dementia-linked
mutation, Pro301Leu, to APOE-TR mice via viral delivery, and found more severe
tau pathology and behavioural deficits at 6 months of age in
Tau P301L –APOE2-TR mice than in
Tau P301L –APOE3-TR and Tau P301L –APOE4-TR
mice 122 . These
seemingly contradictory results are likely to be a result of differences in the
experimental model systems that the two groups used. Furthermore, Shi et al.
measured tau-mediated neurodegeneration, whereas Zhao et al. focused on tau
pathology.

In addition to the findings from mouse models, human iPSC-derived APOE*ε4 -expressing neurons have higher levels of tau
phosphorylation than neurons expressing APOE*ε3 113 . Taken together, these results suggest that APOE
influences tau pathology and tau-mediated neuronal toxicity in an
isoform-dependent manner. Understanding the relevance of these findings to
different neurodegenerative diseases with tauopathy as either a primary or
concurrent pathology will require further studies using models that are more
relevant to the specific disease conditions.

APOE*ε4 is also a genetic risk factor for
DLB 13 – 15 and PDD 15 – 18 . These conditions are both classified as
synucleinopathies, a spectrum of neurodegenerative disorders that also includes
PD 128 , 129 and is characterized by the presence of
hallmark accumulations of α-synuclein, termed Lewy bodies, within
neuronal cell bodies 130 , 131 . Patients with DLB or PDD
often have some degree of concomitant AD-type pathology 132 , 133 , and 30–40% of individuals with AD also present
with Lewy bodies 134 .
Therefore, determining whether APOE*ε4 contributes to
α-synuclein pathology through an Aβ-dependent mechanism, similar
to that proposed for tau pathology in the amyloid cascade hypothesis 135 , or through an
Aβ-independent mechanism 136 remains challenging. However, a study published in 2018
demonstrated that in individuals with Lewy body disease, APOE*ε4 was associated with increased
α-synuclein pathology irrespective of the degree of AD
pathology 137 ,
suggesting that APOE*ε4 impacts the severity of
α-synuclein pathology independently of tau and Aβ. Of note, the
gene encoding LDLR-related protein 10 (LRP10), which is thought to play a role
in the metabolism of APOE lipoproteins 138 and the trafficking of APP 139 , is associated with the development of
inherited forms of DLB and PD 140 .

APOE*ε4 might also directly increase the risk of
TDP43 pathology in the brains of people with AD. TDP43 proteinopathy is a core
pathological hallmark of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and of frontotemporal
lobar degeneration with TDP43 pathology 141 , and often coexists with AD pathology. Of note, APOE*ε4 is associated with the presence of comorbid
TDP43 proteinopathy in the brains of individuals with AD 19 , as well as the severity of TDP43
proteinopathy, even after adjusting for the presence of Aβ, tau and Lewy
body pathologies 21 . These
observations suggest that a direct association between APOE*ε4 and TDP43 proteinopathy exists in AD. A
study published in 2018 confirmed that APOE*ε4 is
associated with TDP43 pathology independently of Aβ in the brains of
individuals with AD 20 .

In summary, APOE allele-specific effects on tau and
α-synuclein proteinopathies, and on TDP43 pathology in the brains of
individuals with AD, have been identified; however, the relevance of these
findings to AD risk and disease progression is currently unclear. Further
studies addressing the associations between APOE isoforms and these pathogenic
proteins, using a model that reflects disease-specific conditions, should
increase our understanding of APOE pathobiology within the context of AD.

Evidence suggests that APOE has an important role in regulating the
innate immune response to amyloid pathology and neurodegeneration. Microglia
play a central role in the immune response in the brain, highlighted by the
abundant reactive microgliosis surrounding Aβ plaques in post-mortem
brain tissue from individuals with AD 142 . These disease-associated microglia (DAM) 143 – 145 , also referred to as a microglial
neurodegenerative (MGnD) phenotype 146 , have a conserved transcriptional signature across
mouse models of AD. APOE is among these DAM-associated genes,
as APOE expression by microglia is upregulated in association
with ageing and amyloid and tau pathology 14 . By contrast, APOE deficiency diminishes the DAM
signature in AD mouse models 146 , 147 ,
highlighting the crucial role of APOE in regulating DAM phenotypes.

The various APOE isoforms seem to modulate microglial functions
differently in AD pathogenesis 148 . Human iPSC-derived microglia-like cells carrying APOE*ε4 exhibit altered morphologies and reduced
levels of Aβ phagocytosis when compared with those carrying APOE*ε3 94 . APOE4 also increases microglial reactivity against
Aβ plaques in a mouse model of amyloid pathology 149 . Furthermore, APOE4 boosts microglial
proinflammatory activation and neurodegeneration in a tau transgenic mouse
model 12 . One
suggestion is that the specific lipid composition of the APOE4 lipoprotein
affects lipid raft structures on microglial cell membranes to induce a stronger
DAM phenotype, which exacerbates Aβ or tau pathogenesis and
neurodegeneration 150 .

APOE is an endogenous ligand of triggering receptor expressed on myeloid
cells 2 (TREM2) 151 – 153 , a cell surface receptor
expressed exclusively by microglia in the brain. A rare coding variant of TREM2 is associated with increased risk of AD, with an
effect size comparable to that of APOE*ε4 154 , 155 . Furthermore, TREM2 is likely to mediate the
APOE-dependent molecular signatures in microglia 146 , 150 , 156 . As such,
the APOE–TREM2 pathway might contribute to AD pathogenesis through the
modulation of microglial homeostasis 157 , 158 .

A study published in 2019 demonstrated that amyloid plaque seeding was
increased in the absence of functional TREM2, both in animal models and in
individuals with AD 159 . Lack
of TREM2 was also associated with a reduction in plaque-associated APOE. Of
note, levels of plaque-associated APOE were substantially reduced on microglial
depletion in a mouse model of amyloid pathology, indicating that microglia
represent a prominent source of amyloid plaque-associated APOE. Thus, microglial
APOE seems to be induced in a TREM2-dependent manner, suggesting an important
association of APOE with TREM2 in the context of AD pathogenesis.

Increasing evidence indicates that the presence of APOE*ε4 is associated with increased synaptic
degeneration 160 and
synaptic accumulation of Aβ oligomers 66 , along with reductions in dendritic density 161 , plasticity 160 and numbers of glutamate
receptors 162 , in the
brains of individuals with AD. In addition, the levels of the synaptic markers
synaptophysin, syntaxin 1 and postsynaptic density protein 95 (PSD95) are
reduced in the brains of APOE*ε4 carriers, and levels of
PSD95 are increased in the brains of APOE*ε2 carriers 163 .
Consistent with findings from post-mortem human brains, reduced expression of
synaptic proteins 164 , 165 , reduced dendritic spine
density and length 166 , and
impaired synaptic transmission 167 , 168 have all
been observed in APOE4-TR mice when compared with APOE3-TR mice. In addition,
APOE4 reduces neuronal surface expression of the LDLR family member APOER2 (also
known as LRP8), along with NMDA and AMPA receptors, by sequestering them in the
intracellular endosomal compartments 169 , leading to suppression of reelin-mediated synaptic
transmission. Therefore, the isoform-dependent effect of APOE on the
intracellular trafficking of lipoprotein and glutamate receptors represents a
potential mechanism by which APOE4 can impair synaptic plasticity 170 . Furthermore, hippocampal
neurogenesis and hilar GABAergic neurotransmission are impaired in mice carrying APOE*ε4 171 – 173 .

Collectively, these results suggest that APOE4 is either less efficient
at maintaining synaptic integrity and neurogenesis than other AOPE isoforms or
has a toxic effect 113 on
these spine-related and synapse-related pathways. Given that synaptic loss
strongly correlates with cognitive decline in AD, the impact of APOE4 on
synaptic function and neurogenesis might combine with other APOE4-mediated
pathways and AD pathology to contribute to the earlier onset of symptoms.

Several lipid transport-related properties of APOE have been shown to be
isoform-dependent. Although in vitro studies using cell systems with limited
relevance to human brain physiology such as HEK293 cells and immortalized mouse
astrocytes generated inconsistent results 174 , 175 , a more
recent study using iPSC-derived astrocytes showed that APOE4 is less lipidated
than APOE3, which could potentially diminish the neurotrophic function of
APOE4 176 . In
addition, in the CSF, APOE particles are larger in APOE*ε2/ε3 individuals and smaller in both APOE*ε3/ε4 and APOE*ε4/ε4 individuals than in APOE*ε3/ε3 individuals 177 . Furthermore, cholesterol efflux
capacity is impaired in the CSF of individuals who are homozygous for APOE*ε4 178 . The amount of poorly lipidated APOE in the CSF is
higher in APOE*ε4 carriers than in APOE*ε4 non-carriers 179 . Overall, the APOE isoform effects on
the APOE–lipid interaction support a loss-of-function effect of APOE*ε4 , with APOE4 being less efficient than APOE2
or APOE3 at transporting lipids to neurons.

The overall lipid-transporting capacity of APOE could also be affected
by the amount of this molecule within the brain 180 . In mice, the quantity of APOE in
CSF 181 , 182 , ISF 183 and brain parenchyma 182 shows an isoform-dependent
gradient, with APOE2 being the most abundant and APOE4 the least abundant of the
three isoforms. By contrast, studies utilizing a mass spectrometry-based
approach in young control individuals (aged 22–60 years, average 34.5
± 10.3 years) 60 ,
cognitively healthy people (aged 43–80 years, average 61 years) and
patients with AD (aged 60–94 years, average 78 years) 59 found no isoform-dependent differences
in APOE levels in the CSF. However, one of the studies found that in a cohort of
Aβ-positive individuals composed of both cognitively healthy individuals
and patients with MCI, APOE levels in the CSF were significantly lower in APOE*ε4 carriers than in non-carriers 60 . Thus, the presence of
Aβ in APOE*ε4 carriers might further exacerbate
APOE4-mediated loss of neuroprotective function by decreasing the amount of
APOE4 available to transport lipids to neurons.

Several studies have highlighted the need to consider the APOE*ε4 genotype when assessing the role of glucose
metabolism and insulin signalling in AD. Cerebral glucose hypometabolism is an
early biomarker of AD and exists in pre-symptomatic individuals long before the
clinical onset of AD 184 – 187 .
Altered levels of insulin, insulin receptors and insulin signalling are observed
in the brain of individuals with AD compared with cognitively healthy
individuals 188 – 190 , and epidemiological studies
have confirmed that diabetes and midlife insulin resistance are risk factors for
AD 191 , 192 . Interestingly, the APOE*ε4 genotype, independently of Aβ,
contributes to age-related reductions in cerebral glucose metabolism and insulin
signalling 193 – 197 . In the brain areas
frequently affected in AD, APOE*ε4 carriers, both with
and without dementia, have lower cerebral glucose metabolism than
non-carriers 195 , 197 – 203 . Phase II clinical trials of an insulin
nasal spray in individuals with AD have shown that the preventative effects of
insulin on cognitive decline are modulated by APOE genotype
status 204 – 206 . In the CSF, increased
levels of insulin are associated with increased levels of total tau and
phosphorylated tau among APOE*ε4 non-carriers 207 . Fasting plasma insulin
levels and free fatty acid levels are also increased in APOE*ε4 non-carriers 208 .

Consistent with the clinical findings, preclinical studies using APOE-TR
mice have also revealed that APOE isoforms differentially influence brain
glucose metabolism and insulin signalling. Compared with APOE3-TR mice, APOE4-TR
mice display downregulation of brain peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
γ (PPARγ) and PPARγ coactivator 1 (PGC1α)
signalling, which is involved in the regulation of glucose uptake and
metabolism 209 .
Following treatment with a high-fat diet, APOE4-TR mice show more profound
cognitive impairment, reduced cerebral blood volume, decreased glucose uptake,
and impaired insulin signalling compared with APOE3-TR mice 194 , 210 , providing additional evidence that human APOE isoforms
differentially modulate brain bioenergetic metabolism. Furthermore, APOE4-TR
mice exhibit impaired brain insulin signalling and insulin resistance compared
with APOE3-TR mice in an age-dependent manner 194 . Importantly, APOE4 interacts with
insulin receptors and traps them in the endosomes, thus impairing insulin
receptor trafficking and related signalling 194 . APOE receptors are also involved in brain glucose
metabolism and insulin signalling. Conditional deletion of the gene encoding a
major APOE receptor, LRP1, in mouse forebrain neurons leads to impaired brain
insulin signalling and a reduced capacity to metabolize glucose 211 .

APOE*ε4 is a risk factor for vascular cognitive
impairment 212 , 213 , suggesting a possible link
between this allele and neurovascular unit dysfunction. Imaging studies have
shown that the presence of APOE*ε4 is associated with
increased severity of white matter hyperintensities independently of AD
diagnosis 214 , 215 . In cognitively healthy
individuals, APOE*ε4 carriers show a higher CSF:plasma
albumin quotient than APOE*ε4 non-carriers 216 , suggesting that BBB
integrity is disrupted in the carriers. APOE*ε4 carrier
status is also associated with accelerated pericyte degeneration and loss of BBB
integrity in AD, as observed in post-mortem brain tissue 217 . Thus, multiple layers of clinical
evidence suggest a link between APOE*ε4 and impaired
cerebrovascular integrity and function, both in the presence and absence of AD
pathology.

Consistent with these findings, reduced cerebral blood flow, vascular
density and neurovascular coupling are observed in APOE4-TR mice compared with
APOE2-TR and APOE3-TR mice 218 – 220 .
Loss of BBB integrity has also been observed in APOE4-TR mice 218 , 219 , although conflicting results have been
obtained 221 . Another
study showed that cerebral hypoperfusion, white matter damage and cognitive
impairment induced by bilateral carotid artery stenosis are more severe in
APOE4-TR mice than in APOE3-TR mice 220 . Overall, these APOE isoform effects on
cerebrovascular integrity and function suggest that APOE4 is less efficient than
APOE2 or APOE3 at maintaining cerebrovascular homeostasis. Of note, analysis
using data sets from the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative
(ADNI) 222 , and a CSF
biomarker study 223 both
indicated a role for vascular dysregulation in the early stages of the AD
cascade. Thus, determining how the cerebrovascular effects of APOE4 drive AD
pathogenesis could represent an important area for future studies.

The cerebrovascular contribution to cognitive decline and synaptic
dysfunction probably combines with the accumulation of pathogenic proteins, such
as Aβ 224 , 225 , in both a synergistic and an additive
manner. Therefore, the role of cerebrovascular effects of APOE4 in AD
pathogenesis needs to be investigated in the context of both Aβ-dependent
and Aβ-independent mechanisms. Peripheral APOE4 might modulate
cerebrovascular function by exerting direct actions on the endothelial
cells 226 that form
the BBB, which exists as an interface between the CNS and the peripheral
circulation. In addition, peripheral APOE4 could indirectly modulate the
functions of brain endothelial cells and neurons through its effects on lipid
metabolism, atherosclerosis and peripheral inflammation, perhaps acting
synergistically with other vascular risk factors 227 .

Perhaps surprisingly, APOE*ε2 is associated with
increased risk of CAA and CAA-related intracranial haemorrhage 70 – 73 and severity of cerebral small vessel
disease 215 , 228 despite its protective effect against
AD risk. However, the cerebrovascular effects of APOE2 remain relatively
unexplored.

## APOE-targeted therapies for AD
The current strategies for targeting of APOE to treat AD fall into three
main categories: modulating APOE quantity and lipidation, targeting APOE structural
properties and interactions with Aβ, and targeting APOE receptors.

As discussed above, APOE has crucial roles in lipid transport and
maintenance of synaptic homeostasis. Therefore, AD-related pathways might be
modulated by increasing the quantity and/or degree of lipidation of APOE. In
particular, administration of agonists of the liver X receptor (LXR) and the
retinoid X receptor (RXR) has been shown to positively regulate transcription
and secretion of APOE 229 ,
reduce Aβ deposition 98 , 230 – 233 and restore cognitive
function 98 , 231 , 233 , 234 in mouse
models of amyloid pathology. Oral administration of the RXR agonist bexarotene
reduced Aβ deposition and improved cognitive function in amyloid mouse
models 235 , including
those that also expressed human APOE*ε3 and APOE*ε4 236 , and in APOE4-TR mice 237 . Bexarotene also seems to combat
ageing-related loss of synaptic proteins in mice 238 . However, conflicting results with
respect to the effects of bexarotene on amyloid pathology in mouse models have
also been reported 236 , 239 – 241 . In addition, systemic adverse effects
including liver toxicity are observed on bexarotene treatment in mice 238 , 242 .

Bexarotene treatment does not reduce amyloid burden in patients with
AD 243 . Oral
administration of bexarotene to healthy individuals induced a 25% increase in
CSF APOE levels but had no effect on CSF Aβ metabolism 244 and showed poor CNS
penetration. The clinical utility of bexarotene as a drug for AD might also be
hampered by systemic adverse effects, such as hypertriglyceridaemia 243 , which are mediated by the
permissive action of the RXR–LXR heterodimer on target genes, leading to
activation of specific metabolic pathways in the liver 245 . Therefore, the potential clinical
application of bexarotene has major limitations. From the perspective of gaining
insight into APOE-targeted therapeutic strategies, the extent to which these RXR
and LXR treatment-related phenotypes are mediated by an increase in APOE
lipidation remains unclear. High-throughput screening for APOE agonists using
human astrocytes may help to identify APOE-inducing compounds with
pharmacological actions that do not depend on the nuclear receptor–APOE
axis 246 .

Studies utilizing virus-mediated gene transfer approaches have also
provided insights into whether increasing the expression of APOE isoforms that
are considered protective halts AD pathogenesis. Virus-mediated human APOE gene expression in mice has been shown to have APOE
isoform-dependent effects on brain Aβ pathology 247 – 249 and APOE lipidation 250 . Adeno-associated virus (AAV)-mediated
expression of APOE*ε4 in a mouse model of amyloid
pathology exacerbated synaptic loss and Aβ deposition, whereas expression
of APOE*ε2 in the same model caused a reduction in brain
Aβ levels 249 .
Consistent with this finding, AAV-mediated delivery of APOE*ε2 reduced Aβ deposition in two
different amyloid mouse models, crossed with APOE*ε4 knock-in mice 248 .
Furthermore, overexpression of APOE*ε4 in APOE4-TR mice
increased the levels of poorly lipidated APOE in the brain, whereas
overexpression of APOE*ε2 in these mice enhanced APOE
lipidation 250 .
Therefore, increasing the expression of APOE*ε2 , but not APOE*ε4 , might be beneficial with regard to
increasing APOE lipidation and reducing Aβ pathology.

The therapeutic potential of decreasing the expression levels of
specific APOE isoforms in order to reduce Aβ deposition has also been
investigated in mouse models. Decreasing APOE expression by APOE haploinsufficiency in an amyloid mouse model carrying APOE*ε3 or APOE*ε4 led to a
reduction in Aβ deposition, which was independent of APOE
isoform 251 , 252 . Furthermore, a study published in 2017
showed that reduction of APOE expression by ASOs significantly decreased
Aβ pathology in an amyloid mouse model that was homozygous for APOE*ε3 or APOE*ε4 110 . Thus, decreasing the levels
of APOE3 and APOE4, particularly during the initial Aβ seeding stage, may
be beneficial.

Given that APOE4 is associated with reduced levels of lipid in the
CNS 179 , 253 , which could contribute to the
APOE4-mediated loss of neuroprotective function, the question of whether an
increase in APOE lipidation can reduce Aβ pathology has been
investigated. Deletion of the gene encoding ABCA1, which lipidates APOE in the
CNS, resulted in a decrease in APOE lipidation and an increase in Aβ
deposition in amyloid mouse models 254 , 255 .
Conversely, overexpression of ABCA1 in an amyloid mouse model decreased
Aβ deposition — an effect that was probably mediated by an
increase in APOE lipidation 256 . In addition, an Abca1 hemizygous
knockout exacerbated memory deficits and Aβ deposition in an amyloid
mouse model carrying human APOE*ε4 , but not in mice
carrying APOE*ε3 90 . The exacerbation of Aβ pathology in the mice
carrying APOE*ε4 could have been attributable to an
increase in the amount of poorly lipidated APOE4 in the absence of one allele of Abca1 . Whether, and to what extent, increasing APOE4
lipidation is beneficial in the presence of Aβ pathology remains to be
fully determined.

APOE-mediated plaque formation might also be targeted via APOE
immunotherapy. Treatment with the anti-mouse APOE antibody HJ6.3 induced a
significant reduction in Aβ deposition in a mouse model of amyloid
pathology that expressed murine APOE 257 , 258 . In
another study, Aβ deposition was reduced in an APOE*ε4 -positive amyloid mouse model following
treatment with an anti-human APOE antibody, HAE-4, which preferentially binds
the non-lipidated, aggregated form of APOE 259 . By binding to aggregated APOE in Aβ plaques,
HAE-4 is likely to induce activation of plaque phagocytosis by microglia,
thereby reducing Aβ deposition. Importantly, peripheral administration of
HJ6.3 or HAE-4 does not change the total amount of APOE in plasma and brain
parenchyma 257 – 259 . Thus, the targeting of APOE
that is specifically associated with amyloid plaques is an attractive approach
that would have minimal impact on the physiological function of APOE.

Treatment with peptides that mimic the structural and biological
properties of native APOE reduces Aβ deposition 260 , 261 , tau hyperphosphorylation 262 and glial activation 260 – 262 in mouse models of amyloid pathology.
However, the effects of these peptides on Aβ deposition and other
AD-related pathologies in the context of human APOE isoforms have not been fully
determined.

The pathological conformation of APOE4 is proposed to result from an
interaction between its amino-terminal and carboxy-terminal domains 263 , 264 , 265 , and the
use of small molecules to block this interaction has been explored in
vitro 264 , 266 , 267 . The APOE4 structure corrector PH002, at a final
concentration of 100 nM in the culture medium, was shown to decrease
APOE4 fragmentation and reduce the effects of APOE4 on Aβ production, tau
phosphorylation and GABAergic neuron degeneration in human iPSC-derived
neurons 113 . Targeting
the abnormal biophysical properties of APOE4 represents a potential therapeutic
approach; however, the efficacy of this approach in vivo, in the context of
human APOE isoforms and amyloid pathology, remains to be investigated.

Conversion of the APOE4 amino acid sequence into that of APOE3 or APOE2
seems to be a more straightforward approach to modulate the pathobiology of
APOE4. Conversion of APOE*ε4 to APOE*ε3 by gene editing considerably alters cellular
phenotypes 94 , 113 . Reductions in APOE
fragmentation, Aβ production, tau phosphorylation and GABAergic neuron
degeneration are observed in iPSC-derived neurons when APOE*ε4 is converted to APOE*ε3 , suggesting that the detrimental effect of
APOE4 could be abolished by gene editing 113 . Similarly, converting APOE*ε4 to APOE*ε3 attenuates several AD-related phenotypes in
glial cells and organoids: this intervention enhances the ability of glial cells
to endocytose extracellular Aβ and significantly reduces the amount of
Aβ deposition in organoids after 6 months of culture 94 . Despite these promising in vitro
findings, the in vivo feasibility and clinical translatability of this
therapeutic concept remain to be determined.

Inhibition of the APOE–Aβ interaction by the synthetic
peptide Aβ12–28P, which is homologous to the APOE binding site on
the full-length Aβ molecule, reduced Aβ deposition 268 – 270 and insoluble tau
accumulation 270 in AD
mouse models, and intra-neuronal Aβ accumulation 271 in primary hippocampal neurons. In
addition, treatment with Aβ12–28P decreased brain Aβ
accumulation, co-deposition of APOE within Aβ plaques and neuritic
degeneration in amyloid mouse models with APOE2-TR and APOE4-TR
backgrounds 272 .
Therefore, blocking APOE-mediated facilitation of Aβ assembly and/or
deposition with a synthetic peptide seems to be beneficial in reducing Aβ
pathology, irrespective of APOE isoforms.

Given that clearance of Aβ in the brain is partially mediated by
APOE receptors, including LDLR and LRP1 28 , 29 , 273 , increasing the expression of these
receptors is a potential therapeutic strategy to reduce Aβ pathology. In
mouse models of amyloid pathology, Ldlr deficiency is
associated with increased Aβ deposition 274 , 275 , whereas overexpression of Ldlr leads to
enhanced Aβ clearance and decreased Aβ deposition 276 . Conditional knockout of Lrp1 in neurons 277 , astrocytes 278 and vascular smooth muscle cells 279 led to increased Aβ deposition
in amyloid mouse models. Furthermore, treatment of animal models with
compounds 280 that
have been clinically explored for AD therapy, including fluvastatin 281 , decreases Aβ
deposition and/or enhances Aβ clearance, probably by increasing Lrp1 expression. Whether these APOE receptor-related
effects are mediated by APOE remains to be elucidated.

As with any attempts to target proteins that have essential
physiological functions, a major challenge for APOE-targeted therapy is to
minimize potential adverse effects on APOE-dependent brain homeostasis and
systemic physiology. One individual with an ablative homozygous APOE frameshift mutation did not exhibit substantial
neurocognitive deficits at the age of 40 years 282 . However, the impact of APOE deficiency
on brain physiology in the context of ageing and AD development has not been
documented. Thus, it will be crucial to monitor the effects of modulating APOE
levels not only on AD pathogenesis, but also on brain physiology at different
stages of AD development. The potential impact of APOE-targeted therapy on
peripheral lipid metabolism and related physiology should also be considered.
For example, modulating the amount of APOE or the expression of APOE receptors
in the periphery could increase the risk of hyperlipidaemia, atherosclerosis and
cardiovascular events, owing to impaired lipoprotein metabolism. Although
increasing APOE2 levels in the brain might be beneficial, long-term expression
of APOE2 could increase the risk of CAA, CAA-related intracerebral
haemorrhage 70 – 73 and perhaps primary
tauopathy 122 .

These adverse effects could be managed by optimizing the treatment
strategy for each APOE genotype, taking into consideration the
treatment duration, the therapeutic window, and the specific biochemical
properties and in vivo distribution of the pathogenic forms of APOE.
Furthermore, the identification of APOE downstream effectors 219 that modulate AD
pathogenesis could provide therapeutic options with a limited impact on
APOE-related physiology. Finally, the development and integration of novel
technologies, such as targeted in vivo gene editing and more efficient drug
delivery methods, could accelerate the clinical translation of APOE-targeted
therapeutic concepts that have been uncovered in basic studies.

## Conclusions
Strong evidence suggests that human APOE isoforms modulate AD pathogenesis
primarily through their differential effects on Aβ clearance and aggregation.
However, APOE isoforms also differentially affect multiple pathways that are not
necessarily dependent on Aβ, with APOE4 exhibiting either a gain of toxic
function or a loss of physiological function. Associations between APOE isoforms and
tau-mediated neurodegeneration, and the risk of multiple neurodegenerative
proteinopathies found in the brains of individuals with AD, are also recognized.
Furthermore, a growing body of evidence links APOE with TREM2, highlighting the
crucial role of APOE in the innate immune response in the brain.

To elucidate the precise pathological mechanism by which the APOE polymorphism determines the risk of AD ( Table 1 ), several important yet underappreciated aspects
of APOE pathobiology need to be determined. These aspects include the
structure–function relationships for the different APOE isoforms, the impact
of peripheral APOE on brain neurobiology and pathobiology, Aβ-dependent and
independent protective pathways activated by APOE2, similarities and differences in
the role of APOE in late-onset and early-onset AD ( Box 2 ), sex– APOE genotype
interactions ( Box 3 ), and the role of
APOE in immune responses and cerebrovascular pathways. As APOE is expressed by
multiple cell types in the brain and periphery, the specific contributions of
cell-autonomous versus cell-non-autonomous effects of APOE at different stages of AD
development will also need to be investigated, perhaps using conditional mouse
models and human cerebral organoids 283 , combined with human studies. Finally, a precision medicine
approach based on APOE genotype status could facilitate the
development of different AD treatment strategies ( Box 4 , FIG.
5 ). Establishment of APOE-based therapeutics is a considerable challenge;
however, the targeting of APOE and its pathogenic interconnections offers great
promise for the prevention and/or treatment of AD.