# Title
Endosomal Dysfunction Induced by Directly Overactivating Rab5 Recapitulates Prodromal and Neurodegenerative Features of Alzheimer’s Disease

# Abstract
Neuronal endosomal dysfunction, the earliest known pathobiology specific to Alzheimer’s disease (AD), is mediated by the aberrant activation of Rab5 triggered by APP-β secretase cleaved C-terminal fragment (APP-βCTF). To distinguish pathophysiological consequences specific to overactivated Rab5 itself, we activate Rab5 independently from APP-βCTF in the PA-Rab5 mouse model. We report that Rab5 overactivation alone recapitulates diverse prodromal and degenerative features of AD. Modest neuron-specific transgenic Rab5 expression inducing hyperactivation of Rab5 comparable to that in AD brain reproduces AD-related Rab5-endosomal enlargement and mistrafficking, hippocampal synaptic plasticity deficits via accelerated AMPAR endocytosis and dendritic spine loss, and tau hyperphosphorylation via activated glycogen synthase kinase-3β. Importantly, Rab5-mediated endosomal dysfunction induces progressive cholinergic neurodegeneration and impairs hippocampal-dependent memory. Aberrant neuronal Rab5-endosome signaling, therefore, drives a pathogenic cascade distinct from β-amyloid-related neurotoxicity, which includes prodromal and neurodegenerative features of AD, and suggests Rab5 overactivation as a potential therapeutic target.

## INTRODUCTION
Endosome dysfunction is strongly implicated in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) based on robust neuropathological, genetic, and biological evidence ( Nixon, 2017 ). Abnormally enlarged early endosomes positive for the small guanosine triphosphatase (GTPase) Rab5 are invariably observed in late-onset AD and early-onset forms of AD due to amyloid precursor protein (APP) mutation or duplication, and are the earliest neuronal pathology specific to this disease thus far identified. Endosome anomalies precede amyloid β (Aβ) deposition in AD and begin to appear perinatally in Down syndrome (DS), the most common cause of early-onset AD ( Cataldo et al., 2000 , 2004 ). Endosome enlargement accompanying accelerated endocytosis and fusion ( Cataldo et al., 1997 , 2008 ), upregulated transcription of endocytosis-related genes ( Ginsberg et al., 2010a , 2010b , 2011 ), and aberrant signaling by endosomes are the immediate consequences of pathological Rab5 overactivation ( Cataldo et al., 2008 ; Kim et al., 2016 ; Xu et al., 2016 ) and can be reversed by normalizing Rab5 activity ( Kim et al., 2016 ; Xu et al., 2016 ). In DS primary fibroblasts ( Jiang et al., 2010 ; Kim et al., 2016 ) and neurons of AD and DS models, Rab5 overactivation has been shown to be strictly dependent on APP-βCTF (carboxyl-terminal fragment). In the case of DS (trisomy 21) APP-βCTF is elevated due to an extra copy of APP ( Jiang et al., 2010 , 2016 ; Kim et al., 2016 ; Nixon, 2017 ) and, in AD, due to increased β-site APP-cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1) activity ( Pera et al., 2013 ) despite normal APP expression ( Kim et al., 2016 ). APP-βCTF on endosomes directly binds and recruits the signaling molecule APPL1 (adaptor protein containing pleckstrin homology domain, phosphotyrosine binding domain and leucine zipper motif), which stabilizes the active form of Rab5 (GTP-Rab5) on endosomes ( Kim et al., 2016 ).

APP-βCTF-dependent endosomal enlargement has also been confirmed in neurons from AD patients ( Kim et al., 2016 ). patient-derived human induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) ( Israel et al., 2012 ; Hung and Livesey, 2018 ), and CRISPR-generated iPSC lines carrying familial AD mutations ( Kwart et al., 2019 ), further corroborating Rab5-mediated endosomal dysfunction as a unifying cytopathological hallmark of AD. In addition to APP, other genetic AD risk factors may promote Rab5 activation by APP-βCTF-dependent or -independent mechanisms, including the E4 allele of apolipoprotein E ( Cataldo et al., 2000 ; Liu et al., 2013 ; Lin et al., 2018 ) and RIN3 encoding for guanine nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs) catalyzing the guanosine diphosphate (GDP)-to-GTP exchange ( Kajiho et al., 2003 ; Lambert et al., 2013 ; Xu et al., 2018 ). Additional genes and proteins associated with increased AD risk or progression ( Karch and Goate, 2015 ; Lambert et al., 2013 ) contribute to endosome swelling by regulating endosome exit routes ( Cormont et al., 2003 ; Fjorback and Andersen, 2012 ; Miranda et al., 2018 ; Young et al., 2015 ), and others known to regulate lipid carrying functions mediated by endosomes ( Karch and Goate, 2015 ) or endocytosis/trafficking and fusion of synaptic vesicles ( Calafate et al., 2016 ; David et al., 1996 ; Harel et al., 2008 ; Zhang et al., 1998 ) have potential influences on Rab5 activation.

Rab5 mediates a broad range of neuronal signaling functions, as elucidated by in vitro studies in which Rab5 is overexpressed at high levels via transfection or viral gene delivery ( Brown et al., 2005 ; Liu et al., 2007 ; Xu et al., 2016 ). Although fundamental, these studies provide associations rather than proof of principle that Rab5 participates in these different processes in vivo . More importantly, many of these Rab5-regulated functions are also known to be negatively affected at early stages of AD by APP-βCTF/Aβ, such as synaptic plasticity and propagation of growth factor-mediated trophic signaling ( Baglietto-Vargas et al., 2018 ; Bourgeois et al., 2018 ; Hsieh et al., 2006 ; Israel et al., 2012 ; Kim et al., 2016 ; Shankar et al., 2008 ; Xu et al., 2016 ). However, the contribution of endosomal dysfunction induced directly by Rab5 overactivation to these prodromal changes, as opposed to other actions mediated by APP-βCTF/Aβ, is uncertain. In addition, while endosomal abnormalities persist as the disease progresses beyond the prodromal phase, endosomal dysfunction has not been considered as a possible contributor to the neurodegenerative phase that follows, which is instead attributed to Aβ’s triggering tau-mediated neuronal degeneration and amyloid plaque deposition ( Carrillo et al., 2013 ; Dubois et al., 2014 ). As yet, there are no in vivo studies modeling endocytic dysfunction itself as a potential driver of early or late AD neuropathology or attempting to distinguish the effects of Rab5 activation from those exerted by APP.

Here, we induced AD-related Rab5 overactivation dissociated from its major APP-βCTF trigger by generating a transgenic mouse overexpressing Rab5 specifically in neurons via a Thy-1 promoter. While bypassing any APP-βCTF elevation, the stimulus in AD mainly responsible for overactivating Rab5, we were able to approximate the Rab5 expression increase and the level of abnormal Rab5 activation that is seen in AD neurons and DS cells while avoiding confounding influences attributable to APP activity/processing. Remarkably, this mouse model reproduced a broad range of AD-related cellular and functional abnormalities known to arise during both the prodromal and neurodegenerative/clinical phases of AD. Thus, once triggered in AD/DS, Rab5 overactivation by itself appears to become a critical driver of AD prodromal pathobiology and neurodegeneration of the key cholinergic neuronal population linked to memory decline ( Chen and Mobley, 2019 ; Granholm et al., 2000 ; Grothe et al., 2012 ; Iulita and Cuello, 2016 ; Jiang et al., 2016 ; Muth et al., 2010 ; Salehi et al., 2006 ) and that is known to be vulnerable to neurodegeneration at the early stages of AD ( Grothe et al., 2012 ; Muth et al., 2010 ). Until now, the degenerative/clinical phase of AD has been attributed exclusively to the neurotoxic effects of Aβ/β-amyloid. Our results uncover an in vivo Aβ-independent Rab5-mediated pathogenic process beginning at the earliest prodromal stage of AD and leading to degeneration within a neuronal circuit vulnerable at early AD stages and critically involved in cognition. This pathogenic process advances in parallel to the additional neurotoxic events initiated by Aβ/β-amyloid. Moreover, Rab5 overactivation and its signaling effectors are potential targets for therapeutic interventions against AD.

## RESULTS
An ~1.5-fold upregulation of Rab5 expression in AD ( Ginsberg et al., 2010b ) and DS ( Cataldo et al., 2008 ) results in accelerated endocytosis and increased endosome fusion due to APP-βCTF-mediated Rab5 overactivation ( Jiang et al., 2010 ; Kim et al., 2016 ; Xu et al., 2016 ). To isolate the role of pathological activation of Rab5 in vivo from APP-βCTF, we generated transgenic mice, hereafter named PA-Rab5, overexpressing myc-tagged human Rab5a specifically in neurons via a Thy-1 promoter, which directs widespread neuronal transgene expression postnatally ( Barlow and Huntley, 2000 ).

We measured Rab5a expression levels in cortical or hippocampal homogenates ( Figures 1A and S1A ) between 3 and 15 months of age by western blot analysis. Rab5 expression (endogenous+myc-Rab5a transgene) was moderately increased in PA-Rab5 mice, being ~2.5-fold higher, compared to wild-type (WT) littermates ( Figure 1B ), as observed in AD ( Ginsberg et al., 2010b ) and DS ( Cataldo et al., 2008 ). A similar, although slightly lower, increase in Rab5 was observed in cortical homogenates probed with a pan-Rab5 antibody ( Figure S1B ), which is consistent with the specific overexpression of Rab5a (see respective figure legend and STAR Methods for further details). Myc-Rab5a transgene, as detected by a myc-tag-directed antibody, was only seen in PA-Rab5, running between 25 and 30 kDa, as expected ( Figures S1A and S1B ).

Anti-Myc and -Rab5 immunofluorescence (IF) for regional evaluation of Rab5 expression ( Figure S1C ) revealed the highest transgene expression in the cortex, hippocampus, amygdala, and midbrain and lower expression in the thalamus, striatum, and cerebellum.

This moderate increase in Rab5 expression resulted in a significant overactivation of Rab5 in both hippocampal ( Figures 1C , 1D , S1D , and S1E ) and cortical ( Figures 1E , 1F , S1E , and S1F ) samples of 6- to 8-month-old PA-Rab5 compared with WT littermates, as assessed by multiple approaches. The levels of activated, GTP-bound Rab5 in hippocampal homogenates were determined by a GTP-agarose pull-down assay ( Xu et al., 2016 ), followed by detection with anti-Rab5 antibody ( Figure 1C ). We determined an ~2-fold increase in GTP-bound Rab5 (expressed as Rab5-GTP/total Rab5) in PA-Rab5 mice compared with WT ( Figure 1D ). A separate reaction in the presence of GTPγS, a non-hydrolyzable GTP analog, before sample incubation with GTP-agarose beads was carried out that demonstrated low binding. Then, we directly measured levels of activated Rab5 in hippocampal endosome-enriched cytosolic (EEcyt) preparations by selective immunoprecipitation (IP) with a Rab5-GTP-specific antibody ( Figure S1D ). Immunoblot analysis confirmed Rab5 overactivation in PA-Rab5 mice, as shown by greater IP of GTP-bound Rab5, compared to WT mice. As an additional approach, we performed IP of the Rab5 GEF, RabGEF-1, from EEcyt ( Figure S1E ), followed by detection with both RabGEF-1 and Rab5. Our results demonstrated increased IP of RabGEF-1, both alone and in complex with Rab5, in PA-Rab5 mice compared to WT mice ( Figure S1E ). Of importance, similar results were obtained in the GTPγS-treated condition, thus supporting Rab5 overactivation in PA-Rab5 mice. Furthermore, separation of endosome-enriched (EE) from cytosolic (Cyt) and other non-endosomal compartments by iso-osmotic density flotation gradient of cortical post-nuclear supernatants (PNSs) ( Figure S1F ) showed co-fractionation of both RabGEF-1 and Rabaptin5, with Rab5 in a representative gradient from a WT mouse. Western blot analysis of isolated pooled EE and Cyt fractions revealed a significant increase in EE levels of Rab5 and Rabaptin-5 in PA-Rab5, compared to WT ( Figure S1G ). Collectively, these biochemical and functional assays provide compelling evidence of Rab5 overactivation and increased endosomal effector recruitment in PA-Rab5 mice, compared to WT mice, as previously shown in vitro ( Christoforidis and Zerial, 2000 ; Lippé et al., 2001 ; Stenmark et al., 1995 ; Zhang et al., 2014 ; Zhu et al., 2007 ). Finally, in situ IF labeling with the Rab5-GTP specific antibody ( Figure 1E ) revealed increased numbers and size of Rab5-GTP + puncta per cell in PA-Rab5 pyramidal cortical neurons ( Figure 1F ), as compared to WT mice. Rab5-GTP + puncta colocalized with Rab5a endosomes both in cell bodies ( Figure 1G , arrows) and dendrites ( Figure 1G , arrowheads) in double IF staining. This colocalization was significantly increased in PA-Rab5, compared to WT ( Figure 1H ). The proportion of CA1 pyramidal neurons covered by Rab5-GTP + puncta was also significantly increased in PA-Rab5, compared to WT (data not shown). Notably, increased Rab5 expression/activation did not alter APP metabolite levels, as detected by western blot analysis using C1/6.1 antibody ( Figure S1H ) or by ELISA analysis of mouse Aβ40, Aβ42, and relative Aβ42/Aβ40 ratio ( Figure S1I ), indicating a negligible downstream effect of Rab5 overactivation on APP processing.

We next carried out morphological analyses of Rab5 endosomes by IF labeling of tissue sections using anti-Myc and -Rab5 antibodies ( Figure 1I ). Myc-Rab5 transgene was detected in the cell body ( Figure 1I , inset) and dendrites of PA-Rab5 cortical neurons ( Figure 1I , arrowheads), which showed Rab5 + puncta to have an ~2-fold increased IF intensity, size, and proportion of total cell area covered, compared with WT mice ( Figures 1J – 1L ), in accordance with expected Rab5-GTP-mediated enhancement of homotypic Rab5-endosome fusion ( Gorvel et al., 1991 ) and as seen in AD and DS ( Jiang et al., 2010 ; Kim et al., 2016 ) ( Figure 1L , arrow). PA-Rab5 CA1 pyramidal neuron cell bodies ( Figure S1J ) and dendrites ( Figure S1F , arrowheads and respective inset) also showed similar changes in Rab5 + puncta IF intensity, size, and proportion of total endosomal area ( Figure S1K ). PA-Rab5 endosome identity was further confirmed by post-embedding immunogold electron microscopy (EM) with antibodies against GTP-Rab5, which specifically recognized enlarged endosomes ( Figure S1L ) in PA-Rab5 neurites ( Figure 1M ) and postsynaptic terminals ( Figure 1N ), total Rab5, and the endosomal Na + /H + exchanger NHE6 ( Figure 1M ). Negligible staining was observed in the absence of specific primary antisera ( Figure 1O and bottom panels in Figures S1L and S1M ). EM ultrastructural characterization of endosomes, identified as vesicles with single limiting membranes and sparse intraluminal content ( Gruenberg et al., 1989 ), showed that PA-Rab5 mice had a significantly reduced frequency of endosomes with diameter <160 nm, paralleled by a significant increase in numbers of endosomes with diameters >160 nm ( Figure 1P ), resulting in a 2.5-fold higher total endosomal area as compared with WT mice ( Figure 1Q ), similar to the IF results ( Figure 1L ).

These results show that a moderate increase in Rab5 expression is sufficient to drive significant overactivation of Rab5 in vivo comparable in degree to that observed in AD ( Cataldo et al., 2008 ; Ginsberg et al., 2010b ; Kim et al., 2016 ), resulting in an AD-like endosome phenotype, in the absence of an elevation of APP metabolite levels.

Next, we sought to determine the effect of Rab5 over-activation in vivo on the physiological control of synaptic plasticity, given the role of Rab5 in LTD formation via AMPAR endocytosis ( Hausser and Schlett, 2019 ), which is also affected by APP-βCTF/Aβ ( Hsieh et al., 2006 ; Shankar et al., 2008 ). Functionally, Rab5 overactivation in 6-month-old PA-Rab5 mice significantly suppressed LTD upon induction by low-frequency stimulation (LFS) (1 Hz for 900 s) at hippocampal Schaffer collateral-CA1 synapses ( Figure 2A ), whereas LTD was efficiently induced in WT slices, as shown by a significant lasting decrease in field excitatory post-synaptic potential (fEPSP) slope.

As summarized in Figure 2B , overactivation of Rab5 drives the removal of AMPARs from the post-synaptic surface, followed by receptor internalization via endocytosis. This process, which occurs during hippocampal LTD, has been shown to be associated with changes in the phosphorylation of the GluA1 AMPAR subunit at specific sites ( Lee et al., 2000 ) and has so far been reproduced only by in vitro overexpression of Rab5 ( Brown et al., 2005 ). Therefore, we addressed the biochemical basis of Rab5-mediated suppression of LTD in vivo . Surface biotinylation of acute hippocampal slices from PA-Rab5 revealed a significant reduction in the surface/total ratio of GluA1 and GluA2 AMPAR subunits, compared to WT slices ( Figures 2C and 2D ), despite similar total receptor levels ( Figures S2A and S2B ), suggesting increased AMPAR endocytosis.

We further determined the cellular localization of AMPARs in situ by IF labeling with an antibody against the extracellular domain of GluA2 ( Figure 2E ), thus allowing us to distinguish between surface and total receptors under non-permeant and permeant conditions. GluA2 + puncta, reflecting receptor clustering at synapses, were visualized in CA1 stratum pyramidale and stratum radiatum ( Figures 2E and S2C ). Our results show that few surface puncta were observed in PA-Rab5, compared to WT, suggesting that the vast majority of total GluA2 immunoreactivity represented non-surface receptors. This was confirmed by a significant reduction in the relative ratio of surface:total GluA2 puncta in both regions in PA-Rab5, compared to WT ( Figure 2F ), despite similar proportions of total GluA2 puncta ( Figure S2D ). Similarly, GluA1 + puncta at the surface ( Figure S2E ) and GluA1 surface:total ratios ( Figure S2F ) were reduced in PA-Rab5, relative to WT, with comparable proportions of total GluA1 puncta.

To determine whether Rab5-mediated reduction in the levels of surface AMPARs was accompanied by changes in AMPAR phosphorylation, we used synaptosomal preparations isolated from WT and PA-Rab5 hippocampi. We determined increased levels of Rab5 activation in 6-month-old PA-Rab5 mouse synaptosomes (SSs), compared with WT, by both IP with the Rab5-GTP specific antibody and by GTP-agarose pull-down of Rab5-GTP ( Figures 2G and S2G ). Also, the synaptosomal levels of the Rab5 effector Rab-GEF-1 ( Horiuchi et al., 1997 ) and those of the GTPase-activating protein RabGAP5 were increased and decreased, respectively, in PA-Rab5, compared to WT, reflecting Rab5 overactivation ( Figure 2H ). Further extraction of total SS into SS soluble/cytosolic (SScyt) and post-synaptic density (PSD)/membrane fractions ( Figures 2I and S2H ) revealed a significant increase in the ratio of soluble:membrane (SScyt:PSD), or conversely, a significant decrease in the ratio of membrane:soluble (PSD:SScyt), for p-GluA1 S831 and p-GluA1 S845 in PA-Rab5 ( Figures 2I and 2J ), compared to WT mice, consistent with AMPAR removal from the PSD membrane and internalization by endocytosis ( Brown et al., 2005 ). Rab5 overactivation in vivo did not alter the phosphorylation of p-GluA2 S880 , as previously shown for in vitro Rab5 overexpression in organotypic slices ( Brown et al., 2005 ). With respect to the initial homogenates, GluA1 and GluA2 were significantly enriched in SS and PSD fractions, and their levels were similar between WT and PA-Rab5 mice ( Figures S2H and S2I ).

These results indicate that overactivated Rab5 in vivo promotes the removal from the surface and accelerates the endocytosis of the same pool of AMPARs that are affected during LTD, thus mimicking and occluding LTD induced by LFS ( Figure 2A ).

Input/output responses of fEPSPs evoked by increasing the stimulation of the CA1-Schaffer collateral pathway were comparable between WT and PA-Rab5 hippocampal slices at 6 months ( Figure 3A ). However, PA-Rab5 mice showed a significant impairment in LTP following theta-burst stimulation (TBS) at Schaffer collateral-CA1 synapses, compared with WT mice ( Figure 3B ). These findings strongly suggest that Rab5 overactivation in vivo negatively influences CA1 hippocampal synaptic plasticity without, however, altering basal neurotransmission.

To address whether PA-Rab5 functional deficits in synaptic plasticity altered dendritic spines, we used a rapid Golgi impregnation method to analyze hippocampal CA1, CA3 pyramidal neuron, and dentate gyrus (DG) granule cell spines in 8.5-month-old mice ( Figure 3C ). Compared with WT, PA-Rab5 mice displayed a significant reduction in spine density in CA3 and DG ( Figure 3D ), but not in the CA1 region. Cumulative distribution curves of CA1 spine length revealed a shift toward smaller sizes in PA-Rab5 relative to WT ( Figure 3E ), comparable in degree to that observed in age-matched 5XFAD mice ( Figure S3A ), an aggressive model of AD that develops marked synaptic and neuronal loss ( Eimer and Vassar, 2013 ; Oakley et al., 2006 ). A similar shift was also observed in the PA-Rab5 CA3 region, but not in the DG ( Figures S3B and S3C ). Accordingly, the overall average length of CA1 and CA3 neuron dendritic spines was significantly lowered ( Figure 3F ). In addition, as evidenced by ultrastructural analysis of CA1 dendritic spines, PA-Rab5 showed a higher frequency of short “stubby” spines (~71.4%), without a well-defined neck or lacking constriction between the head and shaft ( Tackenberg et al., 2009 ), compared to non-stubby spines (~28.6%); WT mice exhibited reversed proportions (~23.8% stubby and ~76.2% non-stubby) ( Figures 3G and 3H ). Similar changes in dendritic spine morphology have been observed in human AD brain ( Androuin et al., 2018 ) and mouse models of DS ( Belichenko et al., 2004 ; Haas et al., 2013 ) and were shown to correlate with LTP impairment in a mouse model of AD ( Androuin et al., 2018 ). These findings indicate that Rab5-mediated impairment in LTP is also accompanied by morphological changes and loss of hippocampal dendritic spines.

Pro-survival neurotrophin signaling, occurring via the tyrosine-kinase phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K)/AKT pathway, which depends on Rab5-regulated endocytosis and early endosome transport ( Goto-Silva et al., 2019 ), is defective in AD ( Chen et al., 2018 ). Moreover, pathological activation of GSK-3β, a kinase downstream of AKT ( Hooper et al., 2008 ) contributing to tau hyperphosphorylation, has been linked to sporadic and familial AD ( Hooper et al., 2008 ; Israel et al., 2012 ). To determine the effect of neuronal pathological activation of Rab5 in vivo on the AKT/GSK-3β pathway, we performed western blot analysis on cortical homogenates of 15-month-old mice ( Figures 4A and 4B ). We found that PA-Rab5 showed a significant decrease in the phosphorylation of AKT, both absolute and relative to total AKT levels, on threonine 308 (p-AKT T308 ) and serine 473 (p-AKT S473 ), compared with WT, indicating the downregulation of AKT activity, which is consistent with reduced growth factor-mediated trophic support ( Dou et al., 2013 ). Dysregulation of AKT signaling in PA-Rab5 mice may also result from the increased endocytosis of growth factor/receptor complexes from the plasma membrane due to overactivated Rab5 and/or abnormal recruitment of effectors on enlarged endosomes ( Chen et al., 2018 ) and consequent displacement from their normal targets/functions ( Dou et al., 2013 ). AKT activation was also significantly reduced in PA-Rab5 hippocampal homogenates ( Figure S4A ). PA-Rab5 mice also showed a significantly decreased phosphorylation of GSK-3β on serine 9 (p-GSK-3β S9 ), the inactive form and substrate of p-AKT S473 , and conversely, significantly increased levels of constitutively active GSK-3β phosphorylated on tyrosine 216 (p-GSK-3β Y216 ) ( Figures 4C and 4D ), compared to WT, in accordance with increased GSK-3β activity. GSK-3β Y216 /total GSK-3β was also significantly elevated in PA-Rab5 hippocampal homogenates ( Figure S4B ). Double IF staining with p-GSK-3β S9 and Rab5-GTP antibodies of 15-month-old mouse tissue sections ( Figure 4E ) further confirmed a significantly reduced p-GSK-3β S9 IF intensity, indicating greater GSK-3β activation, in cortical layer II/III neurons of PA-Rab5 compared to WT, which was accompanied by significant Rab5 overactivation, as measured by the increased numbers and size of Rab5-GTP + puncta per cell ( Figure 4F ).

As a readout of GSK-3β activity, we monitored changes in tau phosphorylation at GSK-3β-directed sites ( Tenreiro et al., 2014 ) using Paired Helical Filament 1 S396/404 (PHF-1 S396/404 ) and CP13 S202 antibodies. It is important to note that these epitopes are associated with tauopathy within affected subpopulations of neurons during the earliest stages of AD and DS ( Mondragón-Rodríguez et al., 2014 ). Perikaryal PHF-1 immunoreactivity in PA-Rab5 was increased selectively across neuronal populations in layers II/III and V ( Figure 4G ), as confirmed by semiquantitative analysis ( Figure 4H ). Within these laminae of cortex, further analyses carried out using a WT-based intensity threshold (as per STAR Methods ) confirmed the PHF-1 increase, compared to WT ( Figure 4I , top graph in 4J ). By contrast, CP13 immunoreactivity was elevated selectively in layer II/III neurons and involved only ~50% of this population, as determined by semiquantitative analysis (total counts: WT n = 98 neurons; PA-Rab5 n = 168 neurons) ( Figure 4I , bottom graph 4J , arrows). Because of this cell and regional selectivity of tau hyperphosphorylation within tissues that otherwise contained a higher proportion of normally phosphorylated tau, western blot analysis could not discriminate the CP13/PHF1 elevations visible by IF (data not shown). By contrast, total tau immunoreactivity in cortical neuron perikarya was significantly and uniformly increased across the cortex in PA-Rab5, compared to WT ( Figure S4C ), and similar increases were also detected in whole cortical homogenates by western blot analysis ( Figure S4D ). Layer II/III cortical neurons of PA-Rab5 displayed PHF-1 colocalization with Rab5 endosomes in double IF staining ( Figure 4K , top panels, arrows). Subsets of neurons from the same region double-labeled with CP13 and Rab5 showed similar p-tau and Rab5 colocalization and revealed an abnormal morphology ( Figure 4K , bottom panels, arrow). These results support a role for Rab5 overactivation and endocytic dysfunction in mediating the downregulation of the pro-survival AKT signaling pathway, resulting in increased GSK-3β activation and tau hyperphosphorylation.

The selective loss of basal forebrain cholinergic neurons (BFCNs) caused by aberrant axonal transport and signaling from trophic factors is an early pathological hallmark of AD and DS induced by APP-βCTF-mediated endosome enlargement ( Jiang et al., 2016 ; Kim et al., 2016 ; Xu et al., 2016 ) associated with cognitive decline ( Granholm et al., 2000 ; Muth et al., 2010 ) ( Figure 5A ). To determine the specific contribution of Rab5 over-activation to BFCN degeneration, we performed choline acetyltransferase (ChAT) immunolabeling of the medial septal nucleus (MSN) BFCNs at different ages. Stereological counting of MSN-ChAT neurons demonstrated a significant aging-dependent loss of BFCNs in PA-Rab5, compared with age-matched WT littermates, starting at 7 months ( Figure 5B ). Morphological analysis revealed frequent swollen/bead-like profiles ( Figure 5C , upper panel, arrowheads) and remarkable dystrophy ( Figure 5C , lower panel, arrowheads) of ChAT + fibers in PA-Rab5 mice as early as 7 months. Furthermore, many PA-Rab5 ChAT + BFCNs showed abnormal swelling and thickening of proximal dendrites and dysmorphic cell bodies ( Figure 5D , arrows). Similar changes have been observed during brain aging and commonly in AD ( Nyakas et al., 2011 ). Double-labeled with anti-ChAT and anti-Myc antibodies ( Figure 5E ), these abnormal BFCNs accumulated Rab5-immunoreactive puncta at proximal dendrites ( Figure 5E , arrow and inset) and showed abnormal bulging of the cell bodies ( Figure 5F , arrow), which also accumulated Rab5 puncta, as detected by ChAT and Rab5a double IF labeling ( Figure 5G , arrow). These results suggest that Rab5-mediated endosome enlargement, by causing trafficking defects, may also interfere with the axonal transport of ChAT. These results indicate that sustained Rab5 activation in vivo is sufficient to cause the degeneration and age-dependent loss of vulnerable BFCNs, thus recapitulating another early feature of AD pathobiology.

MSN-originating BFCNs send their projections primarily to the hippocampus ( Ballinger et al., 2016 ) and rely on the retrograde transport of signaling endosomes from these sites for their survival ( Chen and Mobley, 2019 ). To gain ultrastuctural insights into the extent of endosomal pathology in the hippocampus of PA-Rab5 mice, we characterized the CA1 and DG areas of 7-month-old mice by EM ( Figure 5H ). Compared to WT endosomes ( Figure 5H , white arrowheads), PA-Rab5 mice showed an abnormal accumulation of endosomes ( Figure 5H , PA-Rab5, white arrowheads) in the dendrites of both CA1 and DG areas. PA-Rab5 mice also displayed mild degenerative profiles, consisting of the presence of autophagic structures in dendrites, pre-synaptic terminals, and neurites ( Figure 5H , PA-Rab5, red arrows). These results suggest that defective retrograde transport of signaling endosomes along cholinergic projections in MSN to the hippocampus, together with downregulated AKT-mediated pro-survival signaling ( Figure S4A ), contribute to the degeneration of BFCNs in PA-Rab5 mice. Furthermore, the hippocampal degenerative phenotype can result directly from Rab5 overactivation in this region or be secondary to the lack of appropriate cholinergic input from the MSN ( Haam and Yakel, 2017 ).

Memory function was examined in 6-month-old mice by the non-spatial hippocampal-dependent novel object recognition test (ORT) ( Figure 5I ). WT and PA-Rab5 mice showed similar total exploration times during the training (e1) or at 24-h testing (e2) ( Figure 5J ), however, PA-Rab5 mice showed significantly reduced ORT performance at 24 h retention ( Figure 5K ) indicating that Rab5 overactivation in vivo is sufficient to drive impairment of long-term memory.

## DISCUSSION
The formulation of a preclinical or prodromal stage of AD highlights the concept that AD starts silently decades before the diagnostic neuropathological lesions and dementia become apparent ( Carrillo et al., 2013 ; Dubois et al., 2014 ). Despite the growing recognition that intervention at the prodromal stage may be needed to treat AD effectively, the biological underpinnings of the AD prodrome have been poorly understood. On the one hand, Rab5-mediated endosomal dysfunction occurs very early in AD ( Nixon, 2017 ) and has been thought to contribute to the preclinical/prodromal phase, although its effects on the neurodegenerative phase of the disease were not considered ( Mufson et al., 2016 ). On the other hand, a soluble form of Aβ peptide at the prodromal stage is most commonly proposed to be the trigger of the neurodegenerative phase of AD by also promoting the dysregulation of tau homeostasis ( De Strooper and Karran, 2016 ; Mufson et al., 2016 ). However, evidence implicating Aβ as the key prodromal factor initiating the progression of the disease has been limited, despite dominating the conceptualization of therapeutic interventions for AD. Our PA-Rab5 mouse model of pathological Rab5 activation is based on the earliest neuronal pathobiology known in AD, endosomal dysfunction. While APP-βCTF is the main trigger for this endosome dysfunction in AD ( Kim et al., 2016 ; Xu et al., 2016 ), our approach has revealed diverse contributions of overactivated Rab5 to disease progression, independent of APP-βCTF. Of importance, consequences of this later pathobiology can be evaluated in PA-Rab5 mice unconfounded by the superimposed neurotoxicity of β-amyloidosis and its associated downstream effects ( Carrillo et al., 2013 ; Dubois et al., 2014 ).

The results of this study underscore the exceptional utility of this approach in revealing diverse prodromal cellular and functional abnormalities, which include AD-related endosomal dysfunction ( Cataldo et al., 2000 ; Kim et al., 2016 ; Xu et al., 2016 ), striking synaptic plasticity deficits ( Baglietto-Vargas et al., 2018 ; Bourgeois et al., 2018 ; Hsieh et al., 2006 ), and selective tau hyperphosphorylation ( Lewis and Dickson, 2016 ; Muratore et al., 2017 ) via GSK-3β at AD-related epitopes ( Hooper et al., 2008 ; Israel et al., 2012 ; Mondragón-Rodríguez et al., 2014 )—all of which are consistent with abnormal signaling resulting from overactivated Rab5 and now demonstrated in vivo in this report. Intraneuronal Aβ and elevated APP-βCTF, the principal factor initiating Rab5 activation in AD, would normally also be part of this prodromal phase ( Gouras et al., 2010 ; Nixon, 2017 ). Extracellular Aβ has also been implicated in early neuronal dysfunction occurring in the absence of amyloid plaques. Aβ oligomers and AD brain-derived dimers have been shown to impair synaptic plasticity and neuritic integrity ( Brinkmalm et al., 2019 ; Shankar et al., 2008 ) and to induce an early and reversible neuronal hyperactivity in vivo , possibly by suppressing glutamate reuptake ( Stargardt et al., 2015 ; Zott et al., 2019 ). How an early increased excitability reconciles with reduced synaptic transmission in AD is still debated. In our model, however, we have activated Rab5 downstream of an APP-related trigger and further shown that endocytic dysfunction did not directly perturb APP processing, thereby bypassing additional pathogenic contributions from altered Aβ or APP-βCTF levels. That said, a notable implication of our study is that the pathological effects exerted by Rab5 overactivation further validate the pathogenic significance of APP-βCTF, the usual trigger for this Rab5 endosomal dysfunction, as supported by mounting evidence ( Bourgeois et al., 2018 ; Israel et al., 2012 ; Kim et al., 2016 ; Kwart et al., 2019 ; Xu et al., 2016 ).

Equally important as these prodromal effects, our study has uncovered delayed consequences of persistent Rab5 activation that are conventionally associated with the degenerative/clinical stages of AD. Most notably, these include the dystrophy and progressive loss of cholinergic neurons in the basal forebrain, a neuronal population considered to be among the most vulnerable to dysfunction at the earliest stages of AD ( Chen and Mobley, 2019 ; Colacurcio et al., 2018 ; Nixon, 2017 ) and additional cognitive deficits characteristic of AD and DS ( Granholm et al., 2000 ; Grothe et al., 2012 ). Aβ and tau oligomers have been recently proposed to lead to basal forebrain cholinergic neurodegeneration ( Chen and Mobley, 2019 ). However, it is unclear whether these oligomers in fact perturb endosomal homeostasis, and there is no evidence of Aβ or tau activating Rab5. By contrast, our results show that Rab5 overactivation is sufficient to induce an age-dependent loss of cholinergic neurons without an elevation of Aβ levels. As a likely basis for the cholinergic deficits, our characterizations identify neuritic accumulations of endosomes reflecting endosome transport deficits, due to Rab5-mediated impaired endosome retrograde transport ( Kim et al., 2016 ; Xu et al., 2016 ), and defective endosome-mediated signaling by nerve growth factor (NGF) ( Chen and Mobley, 2019 ; Salehi et al., 2006 ; Xu et al., 2016 ) and other neurotrophins ( Chen et al., 2018 ), previously shown in live imaging studies of cultured primary neurons. Further evidence of hippocampal neuritic swellings containing larger accumulations of endosomes and autophagic vesicles further substantiate the early stages of neurodegeneration in vulnerable neuronal populations ( Colacurcio et al., 2018 ). In addition, the Rab5-mediated neurodegenerative phase induced by Rab5 overactivation includes significant losses of hippocampal dendritic spines, a possible underlying basis for aging-related LTP changes and memory decline. In fact, 15-month-old PA-Rab5 showed functional deficits to a greater extent than what we observed (data not shown), but not at 3 months, further supporting the idea that Rab5-mediated effects on synaptic morphology, transmission, and behavior are progressive, rather than developmental. While reports on previous mouse models may have ascribed these pathogenic events to amyloid neurotoxicity, our ability to dissociate Rab5 activation from its APP-related trigger clearly establishes that Rab5 overactivation is sufficient to mediate these events.

Our results establish Rab5 overactivation as a therapeutic target for AD and further suggest that components of the multiple cell signaling pathways regulating Rab5 activation/deactivation ( Cavalli et al., 2001 ), including multiple GEFs, GTPase-activating proteins (GAPs) and guanyl nucleotide dissociation inhibitor (GDI) ( Stenmark, 2009 ), and endocytic genes implicated as AD risk genes ( Karch and Goate, 2015 ; Lambert et al., 2013 ) represent an additional family of potential therapeutic targets. Furthermore, targeting Rab5 overactivation may prove to be useful in other neurodegenerative conditions involving endosomal-lysosomal trafficking and signaling defects ( Kiral et al., 2018 ). In Parkinson disease (PD), both leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) and α-synuclein (α-SYN) have been shown to interact with Rab5 ( Shi et al., 2017 ). LRRK2 pathogenic mutations result in the dysregulation of synaptic vesicle endocytosis and trafficking ( Shin et al., 2008 ). Transgenic expression of α-SYN in a mouse model of PD caused Rab5 overactivation, Rab5 positive endosome enlargement, and decreased retrograde transport of neurotrophic signaling leading to neuronal atrophy ( Fang et al., 2017 ). The protein product of C9ORF72 , linked to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)/frontotemporal dementia (FTD) ( Renton et al., 2011 ), and that of ALS2 /Alsin, linked to ALS 2 ( Hadano et al., 2001 ), exhibit RabGEF activity ( Topp et al., 2004 ; Yang et al., 2001 ) and have been shown to colocalize with Rab5 on endosomes ( Farg et al., 2014 ; Tang, 2016 ) or on mitochondria upon stress induction ( Hsu et al., 2018 ), respectively. Finally, in Huntington disease (HD), the Rab5 effector huntingtin (Htt)-associated protein 40 (HAP40) recruits Htt to early endosomes affecting early endosomal motility ( Pal et al., 2006 ), and possibly, impaired retrograde neurotrophin signaling through Rab5 ( Liot et al., 2013 ).

Reducing elevated levels of APP-βCTF to normalize Rab5 overactivation in a model of DS (Ts2 mice) ( Jiang et al., 2016 ) has been shown to rescue endosome dysfunction and cholinergic deficits; however, with this intervention, the specific contribution of Rab5 to the rescue could not be clearly distinguished from Rab5-independent actions of APP. This limitation has been addressed, however, in our recent studies ( Alam et al., 2017 ; Jiang et al., 2019b ) showing that blocking Rab5 with a selective p38 inhibitor possibly by overactivation by inhibiting GDI ( Cavalli et al., 2001 ; Alam, 2015 ) rescued endosomal enlargement and cholinergic neurodegeneration in a mouse model of DS (Ts2) as effectively as reversing elevated APP-βCTF levels ( Jiang et al., 2016 ). Notably, recent results from a phase IIb clinical trial on p38α inhibitor in early-stage AD ( https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03402659 ) demonstrated the effectiveness of a p38α inhibitor relative to placebo in significantly reducing cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) levels of p-tau and tau, major markers of neurodegeneration and axonal damage. Although it has been a theoretical concern that targeting endosome dysfunction could abrogate the essential functions of endocytosis, our recent observations demonstrate that AD-related Rab5 hyperactivation is a pathological process superimposed upon physiological Rab5 activation ( Jiang et al., 2016 ; Kim et al., 2016 ; data not shown) and, therefore, can be corrected without depressing physiological Rab5 activation or its associated endocytic functions ( Alam et al., 2017 ; Jiang et al., 2019b ; Kim et al., 2016 ).

In conclusion, our study shows that Rab5 overactivation is sufficient to induce endosomal dysfunction. Our results implicate Rab5 as a major driver of both very early and later degenerative and cognitive deficits during AD development, suggesting a continuous Rab5-dependent prodromal to degenerative cascade paralleling, and independent of, the β-amyloid cascade. Lastly, our results suggest the regulation of Rab5 overactivation as a promising therapeutic target for AD and, possibly, for other neurodegenerative conditions involving endosomal trafficking defects such as PD, ALS/FTD, and HD. The PA-Rab5 mouse represents an example of a generation of AD models that enable the validation of therapeutic targets within this additional pathogenic pathway paralleling the β-amyloid cascade, but unconfounded by superimposed Aβ/β-amyloid-associated neurotoxicity.

## STAR★METHODS
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the Lead Contact, Dr. Ralph A. Nixon ( Ralph.Nixon@NKI.RFMH.ORG ).

All unique reagents generated in this study are available from the Lead Contact and may require completion of a Materials Transfer Agreement.

No custom code was used in this study.

Mouse experimentation and animal care were approved by the Nathan S. Kline Institute’s Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. Transgenic mice expressing the human Rab5a isoform selectively in neurons (PA-Rab5) were generated using the Thy1 expression cassette ( Rao et al., 2008 ). The pTSC21 vector containing murine Thy1 expression was digested and blunt-ended, and Myc-rab5 cDNA was obtained from a pHSV-Myc-rab5 plasmid (kind gift from Dr. Anne M. Cataldo). Myc-rab5 was inserted into the Thy1 cassette by ligation. The DNA for injection was released, purified from a 10% agarose gel, dialyzed, and injected into FVB/N zygote eggs following the protocol at the transgenic mouse facility at New York University Langone Medical Center. To identify founders, PCR with tail DNA was performed. Briefly, genomic DNA obtained from tail biopsies was prepared using the DNAeasy tissue kit (QIAGEN). The following primer pairs were used; Myc-Rab5-forward 5′-GAG CAG AAG CTC ATC TCA GAA GAA GAC CTC-3′; Myc-Rab5-reverse 5′-GTT ACT ACA ACA CTG ATT CCT GGT TGG TTG-3′. PCR program for Myc-rab5 was carried out as follows: 2 m 95°C; 30 s 94°C; 30 s 55°C; 1 m 72°C; 5 m 72°C, and steps 2 to 4 were repeated 30 times. Founder PA-Rab5 mice were backcrossed for more than 10 generations to C57BL/6J (Jackson Labs, Bar Harbor, ME) to obtain a fully congenic C57BL/6J strain. PA-Rab5 bred normally in expected Mendelian ratios and did not show evidence of poor health, such as low body weight, hypo-activity in a novel environment, low activity in the home cage or absence of nest-building, poor coat appearance (such as bald patches or sores), tremors, seizures and/or other easily observed morphological abnormalities or shorter lifespan. 5XFAD mice were obtained from M. Ohno (Nathan S. Kline Institute) and genotyped as previously described ( Oakley et al., 2006 ). Animals were housed under controlled conditions of temperature and lighting and given free access to food and water.

The age of WT and PA-Rab5 mice for electrophysiological and behavioral studies was 6 ± 0.5 months. For morphological and biochemical studies, the ages used ranged from 3 to 15 months. For analyses of dendritic spines using the Golgi impregnation method, 8.5 month-old WT, PA-Rab5 and 5XFAD were stained in parallel. Male and female mice were used.

At the appropriate ages, mice were anesthetized with a mixture of ketamine (100 mg/kg BW) and xylazine (10 mg/kg BW) and transcardially perfused with 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) in 0.1 M sodium cacodylate buffer, pH 7.4 (Electron Microscopy Sciences (EMS), Hatfield, PA). Brains were removed, post-fixed in the same fixative overnight (O/N) at 4 °C and cut into 40-μm thick sections using a vibratome. Sections for immunofluorescence labeling, were washed 3 × 10 min in permeabilization/antibody dilution buffer containing 1% bovine serum albumin (BSA), 0.05% saponin, 1% normal horse serum (NHS) in Tris-buffered saline (TBS), and blocked with 20% NHS in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) for 1 h at room temperature. Sections were incubated with primary antibodies in antibody dilution buffer O/N at 4°C, followed by incubation with the appropriate Donkey Alexa Fluor-conjugated secondary antisera mixtures (1:300; ThermoFisher Scientific) for 1 h at room temperature. Immunolabeling of early endosomes and of myc-tagged Rab5 transgene was performed using rabbit anti-Rab5a (1:100; Santa Cruz Biotechnology) and mouse anti-Myc Tag (Clone 9E10) (1:300; Millipore Sigma), respectively. Activated Rab5 was detected using mouse anti-Rab5-GTP (1:100; NewEast Biosciences). BFCN were labeled with goat anti-choline acetyltransferase (ChAT) (1:250; Millipore Sigma). AMPA receptor subunits were labeled with rabbit anti-GluA1 (1:200; Cell Signaling Technology) and mouse anti-GluA2 (1:200; ThermoFisher Scientific), respectively. To assess cell surface GluA1 and GluA2, sections did not receive treatment with Saponin. Inactive GSK-3β was detected with rabbit anti-p-GSK-3β S9 (1:100; Cell Signaling Technology). Phosphorylated tau was stained with mouse anti-PHF-1 and mouse anti-CP13 (1:250; kind gifts of P. Davies). Cell nuclei were counterstained with DRAQ5 fluorescent probe for 5 min in PBS (1:2000; Thermofisher) and visualized in blue pseudocolor. Confocal imaging was performed using a plan-Apochromat 40×/1.4 oil objective lens on a LSM880 laser scanning confocal microscope (ZEISS) at a resolution of 1024 × 1024 pixels as previously described ( Lee et al., 2019 ). DAB tissue staining was performed as previously described ( Jiang et al., 2016 ). Briefly, sections were incubated with 3% H2O2 and 10% methanol in TBS to quench endogenous peroxidase activity, prior to permeabilization and blocking. Goat anti-ChAT (1:250; Millipore Sigma) and rabbit-anti total Tau (1:500; DAKO Agilent) primary antibodies were visualized with DAB Peroxidase Substrate Kit after incubation with biotinylated secondary antibodies (1:500) and peroxidase using the Vectastain ABC kit (all reagents from Vector Laboratories). Immunostained sections were examined with a Zeiss AxioScope at 20× and 40× magnifications and digital images were acquired using the Zeiss AxioVision 4.5 software.

For quantification of Rab5a and Rab5-GTP positive puncta, coronal sections containing both cortex and hippocampus were used. For the cortical region, ~30–50 neurons per animal (n = 3–6/genotype) were individually analyzed from 40× magnification images with zoom value of one (212.55 × 212.55 μm 2 ) or 3×-zoomed (70.85 × 70.85 μm 2 ). For the CA1 region, Rab5 puncta in stratum pyramydale and stratum radiatum were determined from 40× magnification images containing ~30–50 neurons/field (n = 3/genotype). Image analysis was performed using Fiji/ImageJ software ( Schindelin et al., 2012 ). Following background subtraction using a rolling ball radius of 50 and Yen’s method image thresholding, Rab5 puncta intensity, size and area fraction/cell (cortex) or area fraction/field (CA1) were determined. Data are expressed as mean ± Standard Error of the Mean (SEM) relative to WT and represented as bar graphs showing individual data points for each mouse.

Rab5-GTP antibody specificity ex vivo was determined by colocalization analysis of Rab5a and Rab5-GTP in cortical neurons using the ImageJ software JACoP Plug-In ( Jiang et al., 2019a ). Rab5-GTP antibody validation for use in IF in vitro in non-neuronal cells has been previously shown ( Mani et al., 2016 ) and confirmed by us in murine neuroblastoma cells based on our previous work (not shown) ( Kim et al., 2016 ).

To measure surface and total GluA1 and GluA2 puncta, Z stacks of three 70.85 × 70.85 μm 2 1 μm-spaced optical sections of stratum pyramidale and stratum radiatum were collected and projected into a single image. For puncta quantification, all images were thresholded based on the intensity of the WT permeabilized condition to exclude background signals and to determine the relative proportions of surface to total receptors in each region. Puncta whose areas ranged from 0.005–2 μm 2 were counted and ratios of surface/total receptor were calculated. Data are expressed as mean ratios ± Standard Error of the Mean (SEM) relative to WT, or relative to the respective total counts (%), from 3 mice/genotype and represented as bar graphs showing individual data points for each mouse. Representative fields, 20.52 × 20.52 μm 2 for GluA2 and 30.10 × 30.10 μm 2 for GluA1, from the 70.85 × 70.85 μm 2 Z stack are shown in respective figures to visualize clearer puncta and total GluA immunoreactivity.

p-GSK-3β S9 antibody specificity for use in IF was validated in vitro in N2a cells untreated or treated with the archetypal GSK-3β inhibitor LiCl ( Martin et al., 2018 ) or the selective GSK-3β inhibitor IM-12 ( Ishikawa et al., 2019 ; Schmöle et al., 2010 ) (not shown). The same antibody has also been validated by others for IF of mouse tissue sections ( Chow et al., 2014 ; Sathiya Priya et al., 2019 ).

Analysis of phospho-tau was carried out by cell-based measurements of PHF-1 and CP13 fluorescence intensities in layer V and layer II/III cortical neurons from 12–17 confocal images at 40× from n = 3 mice/genotype (approximately n = 260–360 cells/genotype). A similar analysis was conducted for quantification of total tau from DAB-labeled tissue sections. In this case, 21 fields at 40× from n = 3 mice/genotype were analyzed (approximately n = 500 cells/genotype). The average perikaryal intensities of PHF-1, CP13 or total tau in each field were normalized to WT and represented as box and whisker plots. Further analysis of PHF-1 and CP13 fluorescent signals was performed by setting the average intensity of WT as a threshold, which was subtracted from the intensity of each individual cell. The number of cells above threshold and their intensity were measured. Intensity distributions of PHF-1 and CP13 above the respective thresholds were normalized to WT and represented as box and whisker plots.

Electron microscopy was performed as previously described ( Yang et al., 2009 ), with minor modifications. In brief, mice were transcardially perfused with 4% PFA supplemented with 2% glutaraldehyde in 0.1 M sodium cacodylate buffer, pH 7.4. Brains were cut into 80 μm-thick sagittal vibratome sections and post-fixed in 1% osmium tetroxide. Following alcohol dehydration, sections were infiltrated with increasing concentrations of Spurr resin and flat embedded in Aclar sheets. Regions of interest for ultrastructural analyses, including pre-frontal cortex and hippocampal CA1 and Dentate Gyrus areas, were cut out and 50 nm ultrathin sections were prepared and stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate. The material was viewed with a Thermo Fisher Talos L120C transmission electron microscope operating at 120kV. For endosome quantification, approximately n = 60 EM images (17,500X) per mouse per genotype (WT n = 5; PA-Rab5 n = 4), containing dendritic and synaptic profiles in the proximity (within 5–10 μm) of the neuronal soma were acquired from the pyramidal cell layer V of the pre-frontal cortex. Endosomes were counted and the average diameter distributions within the indicated bins and the endosome area fraction relative to the total image area were determined for each mouse/genotype using Fiji/ImageJ ( Schindelin et al., 2012 ). For ultrastructural analysis of hippocampal dendritic spine morphologies (non-stubby and stubby) in the CA1 stratum radiatum, only profiles with spine heads and necks entirely on the plane of the section were counted from random fields acquired at 5,300X (WT n images, spines = 22, 127; PA-Rab5 n images, spines = 23, 149). Results are expressed as mean ± SEM (% of non-stubby and stubby profiles relative to the total counts per image/genotype) and represented as bar graphs showing individual data points of the. Post-embedding immunogold EM was performed using a previously described protocol ( Yang et al., 2009 ). Briefly, ultrathin sections were mounted on nickel grids, air-dried, and etched 5 min with 1% sodium metaperiodate in PBS followed by washing in filtered double-distilled water and incubated with 1% BSA in PBS for 2 h. Sections then were incubated O/N with mouse monoclonal anti-Rab5-GTP (1:30, NewEast Biosciences), rabbit monoclonal anti-Rab5 (1:30; Abcam) and rabbit polyclonal anti-NHE6/SLC9A6 (1:30; Bethyl Laboratories) in a humidified chamber O/N at 4 °C, washed in PBS, and incubated with 6- and 10-nm gold-conjugated anti-mouse and anti-rabbit secondary antibodies, respectively, for 2 h at room temperature. Mouse or rabbit IgG isotype control sections were prepared in parallel by omitting the primary antibody. Grids were washed and briefly stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate before imaging, which included examination of other organelles as well (e. g. mitochondria and multivesicular bodies), besides endosomes, to ensure labeling specificity.

6-month-old male and female mice (n = 8 mice/genotype) were sacrificed by cervical dislocation followed by decapitation. Hippocampi were quickly removed. Transverse hippocampal slices (400 μm) were cut and recorded according to standard procedures ( Joshi et al., 2019 ; Subbanna et al., 2013 ). Briefly, hippocampal slices maintained at 29°C were perfused with artificial cerebrospinal fluid (ACSF, composition in mM: 124.0 NaCl, 4.4 KCl, 1.0 Na 2 HPO 4 , 25.0 NaHCO 3 , 2.0 CaCl 2 , 2.0 MgSO 4 , 10.0 glucose, osmolarity 290–300) continuously bubbled with 95% O 2 and 5% CO 2 . CA1 field excitatory postsynaptic potentials (fEPSPs) were recorded by placing both the stimulating and the recording electrodes in CA1 stratum radiatum. Basal synaptic transmission was assessed by plotting the stimulus voltages against slopes of field-excitatory-post-synaptic potential (fEPSP). For LTP and LTD experiments, a 10 min baseline was recorded at 1 min intervals at an intensity that evokes a response ~35% of the maximum evoked response. LTP was induced by using theta-burst stimulation (4 pulses at 100 Hz, with the bursts repeated at 5 Hz, and each tetanus including three 10 burst trains separated by 15 s) and LTD was induced using 1Hz for 900 s. Responses were recorded for 2 hours (LTP) or 80 min (LTD) after and measured as fEPSP slope expressed as a percentage of baseline. The results are expressed as mean ± SEM and represented as bar graphs showing individual data point.

Novel object recognition memory was evaluated as described before ( Subbanna et al., 2013 ). The test was carried out in a 40 × 40 cm open field surrounded by 20 cm high walls made of Plexiglass (Stoelting, Wood Dale, IL USA). 6 month-old male and female WT (n = 12) and PA-Rab5 (n = 9) mice were submitted to a habituation session where they were allowed to freely explore the open field for 5 min × 2 for two days. No objects were placed in the box during the habituation trial. Twenty-four hours after habituation, training (T1) was conducted by placing individual mice for 3 min in the open field, in which two identical objects (A) were positioned in two adjacent corners at 10 cm from the walls. A long-term recognition memory test was given at 24h (retention) after training (T2) during which the mice explored the open field for 3 min in the presence of one familiar (A) and one novel (B) object. All combinations and locations (left and right) of the objects were used in a balanced manner in order to reduce potential biases due to particular location or objects p. All objects had similar textures and sizes but had distinctive shapes and colors (Stoelting, Wood Dale, IL USA). Between trials, the objects were washed with 10% ethanol solution. Exploration was defined as directing the nose to the object at a distance of no more than 2 cm and/or touching the object with the nose. Sitting on the object was not considered as exploratory behavior. e1 and e2 are measures of the total exploration time of both objects during T1 and T2, respectively. The Recognition index (RI), or preference score, is calculated as RI = [time exploring the novel object)/(time exploring novel + familiar)]. RI appears to be independent of the total exploration times. The times spent exploring each object during T1 and T2 were recorded manually with a personal computer.

Golgi staining was performed using the FD Rapid Golgi Stain kit (FD NeuroTechnologies) as previously described ( Yuan et al., 2018 ). Spines were sampled on 3–4 dendrites on each of 3 cells per area, per animal, in the dorsal hippocampus. CA1 and CA3 pyramidal cells were sampled in the stratum radiatum at terminal ends of dendrites that branched off the apical dendrites. Dentate granule cells were sampled near the surface of the stratum moleculare at terminal ends of dendrites. Spine density was measured on 50–80 μm dendritic lengths, in 3-dimensional image stacks that were 20 μm deep with 0.66 μm slice spacing, acquired with a Foculus F0442 digital camera (Net GMBH, Germany) with a 100×, 1.3 numerical aperature oil objective and a motorized Nikon E600 microscope. Every 5 th spine counted was measured for length (distance from dendrite center to spine tip) using ImageJ software ( https://imagej.nih.gov/ij ). Cumulative distribution curves of spine lengths were generated using GraphPad Prism 7.

The number of ChAT-immunoreactive BFCNs in the MSN was stereologically determined using the optical fractionator method and analyzed using ImageJ software ( https://imagej.nih.gov/ij ), as previously described ( Jiang et al., 2016 ). The MSN was sampled dorsal to the ventral edge of the anterior commissure, in every third consecutive section rostral to the commissure. Sections were sampled with a grid of optical dissector counting sites. At each site, a 40× oil immersion objective was used to collect a z stack of seven 2-μm-spaced images. A 160 × 116 μm counting box was drawn onto each z stack, with an upper guard zone of 2 μm (1 slice), counting box of 4 μm, and lower guard zone made of the remaining z-slices. Cell counts were corrected for z axis shrinkage in each brain. Section thickness was 9.35 ± 0.25 μm (mean ± standard deviation [SD]) and did not differ between genotype (two-tailed Student’s t test; t (10) = 1.049, p = 0.319). On average, 337 ± 33 cells were counted per MSN, and the coefficient of error was 0.059 ± 0.005 (mean ± SD).

Surface biotinylation of acute hippocampal slices was performed as described in Thomas-Crusells et al. (2003) , with minor modifications. Briefly, using two 60 mm × 15 mm Petri dishes containing tissue culture filters, eight to ten × 400 μm hippocampal slices (obtained as described above) per filter per mouse (n = 4 independent labeling reactions/genotype) were maintained in ACSF for 1h at room temperature, followed by 2 washes of iced-cold ACSF to chill the slices prior to surface biotinylation. Slices were then incubated with 0.5 mg/ml Sulfo-NHS-SS-Biotin (Pierce) for 45 min in ice. Excess biotin was removed by 2 washes with ice-cold 50 mM NH 4 Cl in ACSF (quenching buffer) prior to slice homogenization and biochemical analysis. To control for receptor internalization (not shown), in a separate set of experiments we performed chemical stimulation with Glutamate (Sigma) using a two-chamber perfusion, as method validation ( Thomas-Crusells et al., 2003 ). In this case, slices were equilibrated at room temperature for 1h before perfusion with ACSF (maintained at 28–29°C). After ACSF perfusion for 40 min, one chamber was perfused with 500 μM Glutamate for 60 min and the other was perfused with ACSF alone. The following washes and surface labeling steps were performed as described above. Slices were immediately homogenized in 0.5 mL of lysis buffer (150 mM NaCl, 20 mM HEPES, 1% Triton X-100, 0.1% SDS, 2 mM EDTA pH 7.4, and protease/phosphatase inhibitors) and centrifuged at 15,000 × g for 5 min to remove debris. An aliquot of the supernatant (~40 μl) was saved as total input. 1 mg of lysed biotinylated samples in 400 μL of lysis buffer was incubated with washed Streptavidin Magnetic Beads (Pure Proteome Streptavidin Magnetic Beads, Millipore) under rotation O/N at 4°C. After magnet application, the supernatant was removed, and the beads washed three times with lysis buffer. After removal of residual lysis buffer, beads were eluted with 45 μL of 1 × Laemmli sample buffer and heated at 90°C for 5 min. The eluted fraction, representing the biotinylated surface proteins, was collected after magnet application and processed along with ~2% of the total initial proteins for Western Blot analysis. Total proteins were normalized against actin and biotinylated surface proteins against Transferrin receptor (TfR). Relative surface/total receptor ratios were calculated for each genotype and results normalized to WT samples.

Synaptosomes (SS) were isolated from WT and PA-Rab5 mouse hippocampi (n = 8 hippocampi per mouse/genotype) by homogenization in 250 μL of a sucrose solution (0.32 mol/L sucrose, 0.1 mmol/L CaCl 2 , 1 mmol/L MgCl 2 ) with protease and phosphatase inhibitors (5 μg/ml Pepstatin A, 5 μM Leupeptin, 1mM AEBSF, 1 ng/ml Microcystin as previously described ( Louneva et al., 2008 ). Briefly, after homogenization, samples were adjusted to 1.25 M and sequentially overlaid with 1.0 M Sucrose in 0.1 mM CaCl 2 and homogenization buffer. Following sample centrifugation at 100,000 × g (32,500 RPM) for 3 h at 4°C using a SW55Ti rotor (Beckman Coulter), the interface at 1.25–1.0 M sucrose, enriched in SS, was diluted in ice-cold 0.1 mM CaCl 2 , centrifuged at 75,000 × g (28,000 RPM) for 30 min at 4°C in a SW55Ti rotor and the pellets washed in 0.1 mM CaCl 2 and centrifuged again. The washed SS pellets were either processed for Rab5-GTP pull down assays (see below) or further extracted to separate SS soluble/cytosolic (SScyt), pre- and postsynaptic fractions using the method of Phillips ( Phillips et al., 2001 ). Briefly, SS were extracted in 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 6.0 containing 0.1 mM CaCl 2 , 1% Triton X-100, protease and phosphatase inhibitors for 30 min on ice and centrifuged at 34,000 × g (19,000 RPM) for 30 min at 4°C. The resultant supernatant represented the SScyt fraction. The respective pellet was resuspended in 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0 containing 0.1 mM CaCl2, 1% Triton X-100, and protease and phosphatase inhibitors for 30 min on ice and centrifuged at 34,000 × g (19,000 RPM) for 30 min at 4°C. The resultant supernatant represented the pre-synaptic membrane (PRSM) and the pellet the post-synaptic density (PSD) membrane. SScyt and PRSM fractions were precipitated with acetone. All fractions were dissolved in 8M Urea, boiled for 5 min in 5× Laemmli sample buffer and ran on 12% polyacrylamide SDS-PAGE gels. Specific protein bands were normalized against Ponceau.

The amount of Rab5-GTP was assayed in total hippocampal homogenates and SS preparations by two methods: 1) by GTP-Agarose pull-down ( Fang et al., 2017 ; Xu et al., 2016 ; Zhang et al., 2013 ); 2) by immunoprecipitation (IP) with the Rab5-GTP antibody (modified protocol from NewEast Biosciences Rab5 activation assay kit cat. N. 8370). The GTP-agarose pull down assay measures the levels of GTP-bound Rab5, by reflecting the guanine nucleotide exchange activity of a GEF protein (e.g., RabGEF-1) toward Rab5 ( Shi et al., 2018 ). For this assay, mouse hippocampi were lysed in GTP-Agarose lysis/wash buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 250 mM NaCl, 5 mM Mg acetate, 0.5% Triton X-100, and protease inhibitors), followed by centrifugation at 13,000 × g for 10 min at 4°C. An aliquot of supernatants (30 μl) was saved as the loading control and ~0.5–1 mg were incubated with 300 μL of GTP-agarose beads (Sigma Cat# G9768) for 4h at 4°C with rotation. Alternatively, SS pellets, isolated as described above, were resuspended in GTP-Agarose lysis buffer, incubated on ice for 30 min and sonicated. After saving an aliquot as loading control, ~0.2 mg of SS proteins were incubated with 300 μL GTP-agarose beads O/N at 4°C with rotation. For IP, isolated SS were homogenized in IP/wash buffer (50 mM Tris, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1mM MgCl 2 , 1 mM EDTA, 1% Triton), incubated on ice for 30 min and sonicated. After saving an aliquot, ~0.2 mg of SS proteins in 300 μL of IP/wash buffer were incubated with anti-Rab5-GTP-, or Normal Mouse IgG (negative control)- crosslinked PureProteome™ Protein A/G Magnetic beads (Millipore Sigma) O/N at 4°C with rotation. The cross-linking reaction was carried out to minimize co-IP of non-specific IgG in amine-free buffer using bis (sulfosuccinimidyl) suberate (BS3), following the manufacturer’s instructions (ThermoFisher Scientific). A separate reaction was carried out in the presence of 10 μM GTPγS, a non-hydrolyzable G-protein-activating analog of GTP, at 30°C for 30 min, prior to IP to stabilize active Rab5 (positive control). The same reaction in the GTP-Agarose pull-down assay served to control for specific binding. The beads were then washed with respective wash buffer, resuspended in Laemmli sample buffer and boiled. The amount of Rab5-GTP was measured following SDS-PAGE and blotting with an anti-Rab5 antibody and the results expressed as Rab5-GTP/total rab5.

Mice were anesthetized as described above and transcardially perfused with phosphate-buffered saline solution. Hippocampi were homogenized in 1:10 w/v homogenization buffer (HB, 0.25 M Sucrose, 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 1 mM EDTA, protease and phosphatase inhibitors) by 10 strokes of a Teflon-coated pestle. Nuclei and unbroken material were pelleted by centrifugation at 800 g for 20 min at 4°C to obtain a post-nuclear supernatant (PNS). The PNS was then centrifuged at 16,000 × g for 20 min at 4°C to pellet heavy membranes and the resultant endosome-enriched cytosol (EEcyt) was diluted in 3X detergent-free IP buffer (150 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 450 mM NaCl, 3 mM MgCl2, 3mM EDTA with protease and phosphatase inhibitors). Approximately 3–5 μg of Rab5-GTP and RabGEF-1 antibodies were used for 200 μg of EEcyt in IP buffer: 1) For Rab5-GTP IP, the antibody/EEcyt mixture was incubated with PureProteomeTM Protein A/G Magnetic beads (Millipore Sigma) O/N at 4°C with rotation; 2) For RabGEF-1 (Proteintech, cat. n.12735–1-AP) IP, the antibody was first immobilized onto the magnetic beads by 30 min incubation at 4°C, followed by the addition of the EEcyt and 1h incubation at 4°C with rotation to minimize GTP hydrolysis for RabGEF-1/Rab5 complex detection. Each IP experiment included positive (10 μM GTPγS) and negative (normal mouse or rabbit IgG) control reactions, as described above. Following the antibody-sample/bead incubation, a magnet was applied, the supernatant removed, and the beads were washed three times with 1X IP buffer containing 0.1% Triton X-100. Samples were eluted with 2X Laemmli sample buffer, heated for 5 min at 95°C, followed by western blot analysis and detection with Rab5 and RabGEF-1 antibodies.

Endosomes were isolated from mouse cortical PNS obtained as described above. 4 mg of PNS proteins were adjusted to 25% OptiPrep with a 50% OptiPrep stock in HB to a final volume of 2 ml. The resulting mixture was placed at the bottom of an open-top thin-wall ultracentrifuge tube (14 × 89mm, Beckman Coulter) and sequentially layered with 1.5 mL of 20%, 15%, 14%, 12.5%, 10% and 5% OptiPrep in cold HB. The gradients were centrifuged for 16 h at 27,000 rpm at 4°C in a rotor (SW 41 Ti; Beckman Coulter) and 20 × 0.55 mL fractions were collected from the bottom using a peristaltic pump for initial western blot profiling (equal fraction volumes were analyzed). Fractions #1–4 and #13–17, enriched in cytosol (Cyt) and endosomes (EE), respectively, were subsequently pooled, precipitated overnight in 7% (v/v) trichloroacetic acid (TCA) at −20°C and resuspended in a 1:1 mixture of 8M Urea and 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 1% NP-40, 1% Na-deoxycholate, 2% SDS. Equal amounts of PNS, Cyt and EE proteins were separated by western blot as described below.

Mice were anesthetized and perfused as described above. Brains were removed and cortical and hippocampal regions dissected out and homogenized in 1:10 (brain weight: buffer volume) tissue homogenization buffer (250 mM sucrose, 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, and protease/phosphatase inhibitors) as previously described ( Schmidt et al., 2005 ). Proteins were determined with the method of Bradford (Bio-rad), and equal amounts were separated on 20- or 26-well Novex™ 4%–20% Tris-Glycine SDS-PAGE gels or 15-well 16% Tricine protein gels (both from ThermoFisher Scientific) for separation of APP metabolites. Gels were transferred onto nitrocellulose membranes and blots were probed with primary antibodies O/N at 4°C, followed by HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies for 1 h at room temperature. The following primary antibodies were used: rabbit anti-Rab5a (1:1000, Santa Cruz Biotechnology); rabbit polyclonal anti-Rab5 (1:1000; Abcam); mouse anti-Myc-Tag, clone 9E10 (1:1000, Millipore Sigma). The majority of this study was performed using anti-Rab5a (cat n. sc-309) rabbit mapping within the C terminus of Rab5a, that is no longer commercially available. We have evaluated Abcam (cat n. ab18211/Rab5 pan-specific) as a viable substitute and will continue to investigate suitable alternatives in future studies. Additional antibodies included: mouse monoclonal anti-Rabaptin-5 (1:1000; BD Biosciences); rabbit polyclonal anti-RabGEF-1 (1:1000; Proteintech); mouse monoclonal anti-RhoB (1:1000; Santa Cruz); rabbit anti-GluA1 (1:1000; Cell Signaling Technology); rabbit anti-p-GluA1 S831 (1:300; R&D Systems); rabbit anti-p-GluA1 S845 (1:1000; Cell Signaling Technology); mouse anti-GluA2 (1:1000; ThermoFisher Scientific); rabbit anti-p-GluA2 S880 (1:500; Abcam); mouse anti-TfR (1:1000; ThermoFisher Scientific); rabbit anti-AKT (1:1000; Cell Signaling Technology); rabbit anti-p-AKT S473 (1:1000; Cell Signaling Technology); p-AKT T308 (1:1000; Cell Signaling Technology); mouse anti-GSK-3β (1:1000; Cell Signaling Technology); rabbit anti-p-GSK-3β S9 (1:1000; Cell Signaling Technology); rabbit anti-p-GSK-3β Y216 (1:1000; Abcam); rabbit anti-total Tau (1:500; DAKO Agilent); mouse anti APP-CTF C1/6.1 (1:500) ( Mathews et al., 2002 ); mouse anti-β-actin (1:1000; Santa Cruz Biotechnology). Immunoreactive bands in the bulk of the results were visualized by enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL, ThermoFisher Scientific) and film detection. Analyses of Rab5 and total tau expression were carried out by both ECL/film and digital gel imager (Syngene G:Box XX9) systems. All images were captured within the linear range of the signal and produced similar results between the two methods. Band intensities were quantified using Fiji/ImageJ or Multigauge ver. 5.2 software (Fujifilm).

Following diethylamine-extraction of cortical tissue, murine Aβ quantification was performed by ELISA as previously described ( Jiang et al., 2016 ). Briefly, mAb JRF/cAβ40/10 or JRF/cAβ42/26 were used to capture Aβ ending at residue 40 or 42, respectively, followed by detection with horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated mAb JRF/rAβ1–15/2 for murine Aβ. The dilution JRF/rAβ1–15/2 and samples was optimized to detect Aβ in the range of 6.25 to 100 fmol ml −1 . ELISA signals were reported in fmol Aβ per g of brain tissue, based on standard curves using synthetic Aβ1–40 and Aβ1–42 peptide standards (American Peptide Co. Sunnyvale, CA).

Significance was determined using unpaired two-tailed Student’s t test for single comparisons, one-way ANOVA with Sidak’s or Tukey’s post hoc tests for multiple comparisons, or one-way ANOVA with Dunnett’s post hoc test to compare every mean with a control mean, when appropriate, using GraphPad Prism 7. Data distribution was assumed to be normal, but this was not formally tested. Most data are expressed as mean ± SEM and represented as bar graphs showing individual data points. Alternatively, data were represented as box and whisker plots, with the box extending from the 25 th to the 75 th percentiles and the median shown as a line, group means shown as crosses and whiskers indicating the smallest and largest values. The variance was similar between groups being statistically compared. A p < 0.05 was considered significant (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001). No statistical methods were used to predetermine sample sizes, but our sample sizes are similar to those reported in previous publications ( Cataldo et al., 2000 , 2008 ; Jiang et al., 2016 ; Subbanna et al., 2013 ; Yang et al., 2009 ). No data were excluded and all the reported data were reliably reproduced. For each figure, samples sizes, P value s and statistical methods are defined in the respective figure legends.