# Title
Disrupted place cell remapping and impaired grid cells in knock-in
model of Alzheimer’s disease

# Abstract
Patients with Alzheimer’s disease (AD) suffer from spatial memory
impairment and wandering behavior, but brain circuit mechanisms causing such
symptoms remain largely unclear. In healthy brains, spatially-tuned hippocampal
place cells and entorhinal grid cells exhibit distinct spike patterns in
different environments, a circuit function called “remapping.” We
tested remapping in amyloid precursor protein knock-in (APP-KI) mice with
impaired spatial memory. CA1 neurons, including place cells, showed disrupted
remapping, although their spatial tuning was only mildly diminished. Medial
entorhinal cortex (MEC) neurons severely lost their spatial tuning and grid
cells were almost absent. Fast gamma oscillatory coupling between the MEC and
CA1 was also impaired. Surprisingly, mild disruption of MEC grid cells emerged
in younger APP-KI mice, although animals’ spatial memory and CA1
remapping remained intact. These results point to the remapping impairment in
the hippocampus, possibly linked to grid cell disruption, as circuit mechanisms
underlying spatial memory impairment in AD.

## Introduction
Spatial memory impairment such as wandering behavior is one of the most
troublesome symptoms in Alzheimer’s disease (AD), occurring in more than 60%
of AD patients ( Hope et al., 1994 ). Despite
recent molecular and cellular findings in AD research, it is still largely unclear
how deterioration of brain circuit function causes spatial memory loss in AD. In
healthy brains of both humans and rodents, grid cells in the medial entorhinal
cortex (MEC) and place cells in the hippocampus form a neural circuit that is
critical for spatial memory and navigation ( Scoville
and Milner, 1957 ; O’Keefe and
Dostrovsky, 1971 ; Morris et al.,
1982 ; Ekstrom et al., 2003 ; Fyhn et al., 2004 ; Steffenach et al., 2005 ; Doeller et al., 2010 ). In this circuit, neurons in layers 2 and 3 of
MEC, containing grid cells, send their axons to the CA1 region of the hippocampus
that contains spatially-tuned place cells ( Witter
and Amaral, 2004 ; Moser et al.,
2015 ; Nilssen et al., 2019 ). Grid
cells and place cells have an ability to store distinct firing patterns
corresponding to different environments, a function called “remapping”
( Muller and Kubie, 1987 ; Fyhn et al., 2007 ; Alme et
al., 2014 ; Kyle et al., 2015 ).
Because remapping of place cells and grid cells can provide subjects with distinct
combinatorial codes for multiple environments, remapping is thought to provide the
circuit mechanism for the pattern separation of spatial memory ( Colgin et al., 2008 ; Yassa and Stark, 2011 ). So far, the causal relationship between
remapping and behavioral pattern separation is not clearly established in healthy
subjects (but see ( Jeffery et al., 2003 )). No
previous studies investigated remapping of place cells and grid cells in AD
subjects.

In AD patients, pathophysiology starts with amyloid-β (Aβ)
plaque deposition from the expression of APP, which may slowly lead to Tau pathology
and deterioration of brain circuit functions and cellular degeneration in the course
of more than 20 years ( Sasaguri et al.,
2017 ). The deterioration of circuit functions, as well as cellular
degeneration occurring markedly in the entorhinal cortex and the hippocampus, would
ultimately lead to memory impairment, with which patients are diagnosed with AD
( Van Hoesen et al., 1991 ; Gomez-Isla et al., 1996 ; Khan et al., 2014 ). To replicate the slow and cumulative effect of
pathological APP on brain circuit functions in mice, we recently generated a
knock-in mouse model by manipulating the endogenous murine APP gene into the mutated
human APP NL-F-G gene ( Saito et al.,
2014 ). This homozygous knock-in manipulation causes Aβ deposition
starting at 4-mo in the hippocampus and spatial memory impairment in a Y-maze task
at 6-mo ( Saito et al., 2014 ). Recent studies
start to show that, in several transgenic AD models, transgenes were randomly
inserted into the loci of endogenous genes, thus disrupting them ( Tosh et al., 2017 ; Gamache et al., 2019 ). Therefore, pathophysiology observed in these
transgenic AD models may not solely derive from the transgenic expression of APP or
Tau, but from the “knock out” of endogenous genes unrelated to AD.
These findings may indicate that phenotypes found in previous studies that used
transgenic models may need to be revisited with another model that assures no
endogenous genes are disrupted. In our knock-in model, the mutated APP gene is
inserted into the mouse APP locus without disrupting other genes. Thus,
pathophysiology in our APP-KI mice is more directly attributable to the mutated APP
gene. Using APP-KI mice, we investigated the remapping of place cells and grid cells
underlying the spatial memory impairments.

## Results
In this study, we specifically asked two questions: (1) Is remapping of
hippocampal place cells deteriorated in AD subjects? (2) If so, is the place
cell deterioration linked to impairment of entorhinal grid cells? Alternatively,
does place cell deterioration occur autonomously inside the hippocampus and
independent from grid cells? To this end, we investigated the remapping of
hippocampal place cells and entorhinal grid cells in homozygous
APP NL-G-F mice (hereafter termed as APP-KI mice). These mice
start to show Aβ deposition at 4-mo in the hippocampus and spatial memory
impairment in a Y-maze task at 6-mo ( Saito et
al., 2014 ). Using this emergence of spatial memory impairment at 6-mo
as a border, we defined a young period (3–5 mo, termed as “young
APP-KI mice”) and an old period in APP-KI mice (7–13 mo, termed as
“old APP-KI mice”).

We first tested if old APP-KI mice of 12–13 months of age show
impairments in distinguishing spatially distinct environments, as in the case
for AD patients’ spatial memory impairment. We used a context
discrimination task, where mice were trained to distinguish two contexts having
distinct sets of visual and olfactory sensory cues (Context A and Context B, Fig. 1A ; see Methods ) ( McHugh et
al., 2007 ). Because the APP-KI mouse is on the C57BL/6 background, we
used 12-mo C57BL/6 mice as a control (referred to as WT mice). Mice were
initially trained to induce a fear response in Context A for three days where a
mild electrical foot shock was given 192 seconds after animals were brought into
the box. ( Fig. 1A , n = 8 WT mice and n = 8
APP-KI mice). Mice were then familiarized with another context, Context B, for
two days. During the familiarization, there were no foot shocks. Mice were then
trained with Context A and Context B for 5 days. During the 5-day training, both
WT and APP-KI mice learned to freeze for more than 50% of time during the
initial 3 min exposure to Context A, where a foot shock was again given 192
seconds after the exposure ( Fig. 1B ). By
contrast, across the 5-day training, WT mice did not develop freezing in Context
B where no foot shock was given ( Fig. 1C ).
APP-KI mice, however, developed freezing in Context B to a similar extent as
observed in Context A, presumably due to over-generalization between two
contexts. To assess a degree of spatial discrimination between Context A and
Context B, we defined Discrimination Index (DI) by calculating
the difference of percent time frozen between Context A and Context B divided by
a sum ( Fig. 1D ; see Method ). The DI obtained from WT mice increased during
the 5-day training, whereas DI did not improve in APP-KI mice. The DI of APP-KI
mice was significantly lower between Day 3 to Day 5 compared to WT mice
(p<0.01 or better, Fisher’s LSD post-hoc test after two-way ANOVA;
p<0.001 for genotype comparison; see Supplementary Table S2 for
statistics details hereafter). These results demonstrate that old APP-KI mice
were impaired in context discrimination.

Next, we investigated place cells in old APP-KI mice at 7–13
months of age. We implanted a recording device containing 64 channels of
electrodes in APP-KI mice and recorded place cells ( Fig. 1E – F and S1 ; no change
observed within this age period, Fig. S2C ). No difference in
animals’ running speed was observed between APP-KI and WT mice ( Fig. S1C ). In this paper
we took an “analyze-all-the-cells” approach because we focused on
addressing how the whole population of neurons becomes deteriorated in APP-KI
mice. To avoid biased sampling toward spatially tuned cells that can be fewer in
APP-KI mice, we collected all recorded principal neurons (termed as “CA1
neurons” hereafter) in our data pool (n=105 neurons from n = 10 APP-KI
mice; n=113 neurons from n = 10 WT mice; Supplementary Table S1 ). No
difference was observed in the distribution of putative principal neurons and
interneurons between WT and APP-KI mice ( Fig. S1B ). Neural activity of CA1
neurons was first recorded in a 1×1 m open field to evaluate their
spatial tuning and place cell properties ( Fig.
1G ). A substantial amount of CA1 neurons in old WT mice showed
spatially tuned spike activities ( Fig. 1H ).
CA1 neurons in APP-KI mice also showed spatially tuned spikes, but exhibited
less pronounced firing peaks ( Fig. 1I ). The
degree of spatial tuning for individual CA1 neurons was quantitatively assessed
using the spatial information score ( Skaggs et al., 1993 ) ( Fig. 1J – L ). The analysis
revealed that APP-KI mice had neurons with less spatial tuning (p<0.001),
with lower mean spatial information than those from the CA1 neurons recorded in
WT mice (p<0.001). However, mean firing rates, field size and firing
field number of CA1 neurons did not differ between WT and APP-KI mice,
suggesting the spatial tuning of CA1 neurons in APP-KI mice was only mildly
deteriorated ( Fig.
S1D ). We then defined place cells using the spatial information score
( Langston et al., 2010 ). Neurons were
classified as place cells if their spatial information score was larger than
0.63, which was the 95th percentile of a distribution of spatial information
score based on shuffled data from 7–13 mo WT mice ( Fig. 1J – K ). This revealed that the proportion of place cells decreased from 50%
in WT mice to 31% in APP-KI mice (p<0.001; Fig 1K – L ). Among these
place cells, we did not observe any differences in their spike properties
recorded from the open field task between APP-KI and WT mice ( Fig. S1E ).

To investigate the remapping of CA1 neurons in APP-KI mice, we then
trained animals to run back and forth in two 1m linear tracks (Tracks A and B)
with distinct colors and textures ( Fig. 2A ,
see experimental protocol). In a daily session, animals made 10 laps for each
track in the following series: Track A, Track B, Track B and then back again in
Track A. Similar to the emergence of behavioral spatial discrimination during
the 5-day training ( Fig. 1 ), CA1 neurons in
WT mice showed remapping across Track A and Track B on the fifth day of the
training, with distinct firing patterns between the two tracks ( Fig. 2B , also known as “global
remapping” ( Leutgeb et al.,
2005b )). However, with the same training condition, CA1 neurons in APP-KI
mice showed unchanged firing patterns between Track A and Track B ( Fig. 2C ). Population vector (PVec)
correlation analysis ( Leutgeb et al.,
2005b ) was used to assess the degree of remapping between Track A and
Track B ( Fig. 2D – E ). A PVec correlation of 0 indicates strong
remapping, whereas a PVec correlation of 1 indicates identical firing patterns
(that is, no remapping at all) ( Leutgeb et al.,
2005a ). Conventionally, remapping has been assessed by calculating
PVec using spatially tuned cells (such as place cells or grid cells). In this
study, to capture the overall picture of the pathophysiology, we first used all
recorded CA1 neurons to assess remapping in both WT and APP-KI mice (referred to
as “population remapping” hereafter). PVec correlation analysis
from all recorded CA1 neurons revealed that WT mice showed remapping with low
PVec correlation between Track A and Track B ( Fig.
2E ). However, APP-KI mice exhibited PVec with significantly higher
correlation, indicating that the remapping of CA1 neurons was disrupted in
APP-KI mice (p<0.001, Fig. 2E ). Mean
PVec correlation in APP-KI mice was significantly higher than that of WT mice
(p<0.001; Fig. 2F ). We did not
observe any difference in the field size, number of fields, firing rate or peak
firing rate in the linear track recordings between WT and APP-KI mice ( Fig. S2A ). Disrupted
remapping was observed independently of the direction of animals’ runs in
the tracks ( Fig. S2B ).
We also assessed the degree of remapping in individual neurons using the spatial correlation score between Track A and Track B
( Leutgeb et al., 2005b ), confirming
that CA1 neurons showed disrupted remapping in APP-KI mice compared to that from
WT mice ( Fig. 2G ). By contrast, activity
patterns of CA1 neurons between the two recordings in Track A were similar, with
no difference in PVec correlations between WT and APP-KI mice, indicating that
stability of spatial tuning in CA1 neurons was spared in APP-KI mice
(p>0.05, Fig. 2E ; p>0.05, Fig. 2F ).

We then assessed remapping of place cells ( Fig. 2H ). PVec correlation between Tracks A and B confirms that
neurons defined as place cells also have severe impairment in the remapping
( Fig. 2H ). Interestingly, the PVec
correlation from two recordings in Track A were slightly lower in APP-KI mice
( Fig. 2H , see Fig. S2D for spatial correlation),
suggesting that the remapping impairment of place cells may be due to their
reduced stability of place fields. In CA1 non-spatial cells, remapping observed
in WT mice was also impaired, whereas the field stability remained intact ( Fig. 2I ).

Together, these results demonstrate that CA1 principal neurons from
APP-KI mice exhibited disrupted remapping for different spatial environments,
while the spatial tuning of CA1 neurons was only mildly deteriorated.

CA1 neurons in the hippocampus receive spatially-tuned information from
hippocampal CA3 via the Schaeffer collateral as well as from the MEC via
temporoammonic pathway ( Witter and Amaral,
2004 ). We next asked whether these inputs contribute to disrupted
remapping in CA1. We leveraged findings from previous healthy animal studies
that identified two distinct types of gamma oscillations ( Bragin et al., 1995 ; Colgin et al., 2009 ) ( Fig. 3A ).
When fast gamma oscillations occur in the hippocampal CA1, the MEC also exhibits
fast gamma oscillations ( Colgin et al.,
2009 ). The oscillations from these two brain regions are highly
synchronized, suggesting that fast gamma oscillations support signal transfer
from the MEC to CA1. By contrast, synchronization of slow gamma oscillations
suggests signal transfer from CA3 to CA1 ( Colgin
et al., 2009 ). We thus analyzed gamma oscillations in CA1 of WT and
APP-KI mice. Recordings in the open field, where animals have relatively
constant running speed, were used for gamma oscillation analyses. In WT mice, we
observed gamma episodes across the slow and fast gamma range (20 – 90 Hz; Fig. 3B ). However, in APP-KI mice,
gamma oscillations were observed only in low frequency ranges, and marginal
gamma episodes were observed at a frequency range above 40 Hz. Comparison of
oscillatory power normalized by gross 1–100 Hz frequency power ( Deshmukh et al., 2010 ) showed reduction of
power at 62 – 100 Hz range, and increase of power at 5 – 8 Hz
(theta) and 14 – 20 Hz (theta harmonics) ranges in APP-KI mice (false
discovery rate (FDR) corrected for 100 multiple comparisons at 1–100 Hz
bins, q<0.05; Fig. 3C ).

To test whether fast and slow gamma oscillations are deteriorated in
CA1, we investigated temporal structures of gamma oscillations. Previous healthy
animal studies showed that gamma oscillations occur mainly at the peak to
falling phase of co-existing theta oscillations, a property termed theta-gamma
coupling ( Bragin et al., 1995 ; Colgin et al., 2009 ). The theta-gamma
cross-frequency coupling correlates with animals’ memory performance and
is suggested to be a mechanism for local information processing during memory
demands ( Tort et al., 2009 ; Axmacher et al., 2010 ). Cross-frequency
coherence plots from WT mice revealed peaks at two gamma frequency ranges at 20
– 40 Hz and 40 – 90 Hz that were coupled to specific phases of
theta oscillations ( Fig. 3D ). We thus
defined slow gamma oscillations at 20 – 40 Hz frequency range, and fast
gamma oscillations at 40 – 90 Hz range in our experiment. In APP-KI mice,
only the slow gamma oscillations from 20 – 40 Hz range were coherent with
co-existing theta oscillations ( Fig. 3D ).
The occurrence rate of fast gamma oscillation was diminished in APP-KI mice
(p<0.001, Fig. 3E ), whereas the
occurrence rate of slow gamma remained similar (p >0.05, Fig. 3E ). Cross-frequency coupling spectrogram
revealed fast and slow gamma oscillations occurring in the peak to falling phase
of theta oscillations in WT mice, whereas fast gamma oscillations were
significantly lost in APP-KI mice ( Fig.
3F ). The degree of theta-gamma cross-frequency coupling was assessed by
measuring the phase-locking vector length ( Colgin
et al., 2009 ). The analysis revealed diminished theta-fast gamma
coupling, while theta-slow gamma coupling was spared (p<0.05 for fast
gamma; p>0.05 for slow gamma, Fig.
3G ). To test whether spike timing is entrained by fast and slow gamma
oscillations, we examined the temporal organization of spike activities during
slow and fast gamma oscillations ( Colgin et al.,
2009 ). Phase-locking of spikes to fast gamma oscillations was
diminished in APP-KI mice, but not for slow gamma oscillations (p<0.001
for fast gamma, p>0.05 for slow gamma; Fig.
3H – I and Fig. S3C ). Altogether, our results
demonstrate that fast gamma oscillations were disrupted in the hippocampal CA1
of APP-KI mice, while slow gamma oscillations were relatively spared. These
results suggest that MEC→CA1 signal transfer via fast gamma oscillations
is deteriorated in APP-KI mice, whereas slow gamma-mediated CA3→CA1
signal transfer remains relatively intact.

Disrupted fast gamma oscillations observed in hippocampal CA1 suggest
that neural activity in the MEC is deteriorated in APP-KI mice. To directly test
this possibility, we next investigated spatial representation in the MEC of old
APP-KI mice (7–13 mo). We implanted a recording device in the dorsal MEC,
and performed unbiased recording of principal neurons in layers 2 and 3 (termed
as “MEC neurons” hereafter, n=61 neurons from n = 13 WT mice; n=
65 neurons from n = 13 APP-KI mice; Fig.
4A – C and Fig. S4 ; no difference in the
distribution of sampling positions between WT and APP-KI mice, Fig. S4B ). To test for their
spatial tuning, MEC neurons were recorded while animals were randomly foraging
in the 1×1 m open field. Among the recorded MEC neurons from WT mice, a
portion of cells exhibited spatially tuned multiple firing fields as grid cells
( Fig. 4D ). By contrast, most of the
recorded MEC neurons in APP-KI mice showed scattered firing patterns around the
open field ( Fig. 4E ). To evaluate their
grid cell property, we analyzed the gridness score by computing
the autocorrelation of their firing rate map ( Sargolini et al., 2006 ) ( Fig.
4D – F ). A cumulative
distribution curve of the gridness score for all recorded MEC neurons indicates
that, compared to WT mice, APP-KI mice significantly lost a group of neurons
with gridness score of more than ~0.4 (p<0.05, Fig. 4F ). To define grid cells, we used a cut-off of
gridness score at 0.41, which was the 95th percentile of the distribution of
gridness score based on the shuffled WT data ( Langston et al., 2010 ) ( Fig. 4F and S4D ). We found
that, among recorded MEC neurons, 20% were grid cells in WT mice, whereas only
2% were grid cells in APP-KI mice (p<0.001, Fig. 4F – G ). The
scattered firing of APP-KI neurons resulted in significantly reduced spatial
tuning (p< 0.001) and increased firing field area (p <0.01, Fig. 4G ). However, we did not observe any
difference in their mean or peak firing rates, suggesting that MEC neurons in
APP-KI mice did not show hyperactivity reported previously in severe transgenic
AD models ( Busche et al., 2008 ) ( Fig. 4G and S4D ). The distribution of spatial
information scores for MEC neurons indicated that APP-KI mice lost a significant
portion of neurons with high spatial information score, suggesting that
aperiodic spatially-tuned MEC neurons ( Fyhn et
al., 2004 ; Diehl et al., 2017 ; Hardcastle et al., 2017 ; Miao et al., 2017 ) were also impaired in
APP-KI mice ( Fig. 4H ). These data indicate
that spatial tuning of MEC neurons, including grid cells, was severely disrupted
in APP-KI mice.

We then tested remapping of MEC neurons. Previous healthy animal studies
showed that MEC grid cells exhibit remapping across distinct environments ( Fyhn et al., 2007 ; Diehl et al., 2017 ). The remapping of MEC grid cells
occurs coherently with the remapping of hippocampal place cells. Consistent with
the previous finding, we observed that MEC neurons in WT mice showed distinct
grid fields between Track A and Track B ( Fig.
5A ). However, MEC neurons in APP-KI mice showed scattered firing
along both Track A and Track B, showing marginal difference in the firing
patterns between the two tracks ( Fig. 5B ).
PVec correlation analysis from all recorded MEC neurons revealed that APP-KI
mice show larger PVec correlations than that from WT mice, indicating that
population remapping property of MEC neurons is reduced in APP-KI mice
(p<0.001, Fig. 5C – D and S5 ). We also assessed spatial
correlation of individual neurons between Track A and Track B, confirming that
MEC neurons showed reduced remapping property in APP-KI ( Fig. 5E ). We did not observe a significant difference
between WT and APP-KI mice in the stability of MEC neurons from two Track A
recordings (p > 0.05, Fig.
5C – E ).

We next assessed remapping properties from each cell class of MEC
neurons. Because grid cells were significantly disrupted and reduced in number
from APP-KI mice ( Fig. 4G and S4D ), remapping analysis
could not be performed for grid cells. Spatially tuned cells were also reduced
( Fig. 4E ), resulting with 12 spatially
tuned cells recorded in APP-KI mice. Although less reliable from the limited
sample number, remapping of spatially tuned cells in APP-KI mice were comparable
to that in WT mice, suggesting intact remapping from surviving spatially tuned
cells ( Fig. 5F ). By contrast, while MEC
non-spatial cells showed discernible remapping in WT mice, remapping property of
non-spatial cells was reduced in APP-KI mice ( Fig.
5G ).

To obtain insight into the causality between impairment of spatial
tuning and remapping property in CA1 and MEC neurons, we measured the
correlation between spatial information score and spatial correlation between
Track A and Track B in individual neurons ( Fig.
5H – I ). In WT mice,
neither CA1 neurons nor MEC neurons showed correlation between spatial tuning
and remapping, suggesting that these two functional properties are independent
in healthy WT mice (p>0.05, Spearman correlation, Fig. 5H – I ). However, in APP-KI mice, we found that MEC neurons show significant
negative correlation between spatial information score and spatial correlation
(p<0.001 and r (67) = −0.49, Spearman correlation, Fig. 5I ; also see Fig. S5D ). By contrast, CA1 neurons
in APP-KI mice did not show significant correlation (p>0.05, Fig. 5H ), implying that the remapping
disruption of individual CA1 neurons is independent from their spatial tuning
property.

To test if the impairment of MEC neurons is accompanied by the
deterioration of local gamma oscillations, we next examined gamma oscillations
in the MEC ( Fig. 6A ). Because previous
healthy animal studies found only fast gamma but not slow gamma oscillations in
the MEC ( Chrobak and Buzsaki, 1998 ; Colgin et al., 2009 ), we focused our
analysis on fast gamma oscillations. We indeed observed only marginal slow gamma
oscillations in the MEC of WT mice ( Fig. 6B and 6E ). No difference was observed for MEC
slow gamma oscillations between WT and APP-KI mice ( Fig. S6 ). The analysis of
theta-fast gamma cross-frequency coupling revealed the absence of fast gamma
oscillations coupled to theta oscillations in APP-KI mice ( Fig. 6B ). However, we did not see any difference in
the normalized oscillatory power nor in the occurrence rate of fast gamma
oscillations between WT and APP-KI mice (q>0.05, FDR corrected, Fig. 6C ; p>0.05 for gamma occurrence, Fig. 6D ). Theta-phase spectrograms
showed tendency of fast gamma oscillations in APP-KI mice being weakly modulated
by theta oscillations compared to WT mice (p=0.051, Fig. 6E – F ). Although our observation revealed only a tendency of reduction, the
tendency was consistent with our previous finding that the theta-fast gamma
coupling was reduced in the MEC of 5-mo anaesthetized APP-KI mice ( Nakazono et al., 2017 ). The spikes from MEC
neurons in WT mice were phase-locked to local fast gamma oscillations, as
reported in a previous study ( Quilichini et al.,
2010 ) ( Fig. 6G – H ). However, the spike-fast gamma
phase-locking was markedly disrupted in APP-KI mice (p<0.01, Fig. 6G – H and S6B ).

To directly test the idea that the impairment of fast gamma oscillations
affects MEC→CA1 signal transfer in APP-KI mice, we implanted two bundles
of electrodes and simultaneously recorded from the hippocampal CA1 and the MEC
(n = 6 WT mice and n = 6 APP-KI mice) ( Fig.
6I ). To test the degree of synchronization between the gamma
oscillations in the MEC and the CA1, we assessed coherence of oscillatory
activity ( Colgin et al., 2009 ; Igarashi et al., 2014 ). Analysis revealed
that the gamma oscillations between the MEC and CA1 have weaker coherence at 58
– 75 Hz range in APP-KI mice (q<0.05, FDR corrected; Fig. 6J ). We then collected oscillatory
activity in the MEC when fast gamma oscillations were detected from the
hippocampal CA1 ( Colgin et al., 2009 )
( Fig. 6K ). The MEC fast gamma
oscillations were significantly desynchronized from the CA1 fast gamma
oscillations in APP-KI mice. This was confirmed by the decreased MEC:CA1 ratio
of fast gamma powers, where fast gamma power of CA1-gamma-triggered LFP episodes
in the MEC was divided by the power of CA1 fast gamma episodes ( Colgin et al., 2009 ) (p<0.05, see method ) ( Fig.
6L ). The reduction of MEC-CA1 fast gamma coupling ( Fig. 6K – L )
without the reduction of MEC fast gamma power ( Fig. 6C ) implies that MEC fast gamma episodes tend to occur when CA1
fast gamma is absent. In agreement with this notion, a reduction of CA1/MEC fast
gamma power ratio was also observed when MEC gamma was used for triggering
( Fig. S6C ).
Altogether, these results demonstrate that the temporal coordination of the
gamma oscillations between the MEC and the CA1 was diminished, suggesting that
MEC→CA1 signal transfer mediated by the fast gamma oscillations is
deteriorated in APP-KI mice.

The above results imply that the impairment of MEC neurons can be a
primary deficit that induces other secondary impairments in old APP-KI mice. If
this is the case, the impairment of MEC neurons may emerge in the earlier phase
of AD progression. To test this possibility, we examined spatial memory and
recorded MEC and CA1 neurons from young APP-KI mice of 3–5 months of
age.

We first assessed the context discrimination of young APP-KI mice ( Fig. 7A – C ). Intriguingly, young APP-KI mice discriminated Context A and
Context B, and did not develop freezing in Context B similar to control young WT
mice (p> 0.05 for genotype, two-way ANOVA, n = 8 APP-KI and n =8 WT mice; Fig. 7A – B ). Discrimination index did not differ between APP-KI
and WT mice (p> 0.05 for genotype, two-way ANOVA). These data indicate
that young APP-KI mice exhibited intact spatial memory.

The hippocampal CA1 region of young APP-KI mice already showed Aβ
plaque formation ( Fig. 7D ). Our recordings
from young APP-KI mice showed that CA1 neurons exhibit comparable spatial tuning
and remapping (p>0.05 for all of spatial tuning, % place cells and
population vector correlation, n = 35 neurons in n = 5 WT mice and n = 50
neurons in n = 6 APP-KI mice; Fig.
7E – H ). Remapping property
was spared in place cells, but was weakly diminished in non-spatial cells ( Fig. 7I – J ). These data suggest that Aβ plaque formation in CA1 does
not affect spatial tuning nor remapping of CA1 neuronal population in young
APP-KI mice.

We then assessed MEC neurons of young APP-KI mice. The MEC showed a
moderate amount of Aβ plaques ( Fig.
8A ). As expected, our recording showed that impaired spatial tuning
of MEC neurons existed concurrently with Aβ plaques ( Fig. 8B – C ). Spatial information was diminished (p<0.01; n = 42 neurons in
n = 11 WT mice and n = 39 neurons in n = 8 APP-KI mice). The percentage of grid
cells decreased to 7.7 % (p<0.05, Fig.
8C ), a milder disruption compared to the reduction to 2% in 12-mo
APP-KI mice. The population remapping of MEC neurons, as well as remapping of
spatially tuned cells, were weakly reduced compared to young WT mice
(p<0.01, Fig. 8D – F ), whereas no reduction was discernible for
non-spatial cells (p>0.05, Fig.
8G ).

Figure 8H summarizes the data
obtained in our study ( Fig. 8H ). The
age-dependent progression of deterioration in spatial memory, spatial tuning,
and population remapping found in our results were plotted for CA1 and MEC. In
these plots, we defined Impairment Index (II) as the following:
each functional property (spatial tuning score for spatial tuning, PVec
correlation for remapping and Discrimination Index for spatial memory) obtained
from APP-KI mice was first normalized by that obtained from age-matched WT mice.
This ratio was then subtracted from 1 ( II = 1 − APP-KI /
WT) so that II becomes 0 if there is no impairment and II becomes 1 if the functional property is completely
impaired (see Method ). Properties in
APP-KI mice with significant reduction relative to WT mice found in the study
were shown with asterisks (*p<0.01, **p<0.001). In these plots,
the impairment of spatial memory was plotted in both CA1 and MEC plots. For
Aβ plaque, percent areas with Aβ plaque in young APP-KI mice were
plotted so that the values obtained from the same area in old mice become 1.
These plots indicate that the spatial tuning impairment in the MEC emerges in
young APP-KI mice, and suggest that this impairment is already close to their
asymptote. By contrast, memory impairment and the CA1 remapping impairment
emerged only in old APP-KI mice. These results demonstrate that the spatial
tuning impairment of MEC neurons emerged earlier than memory impairment or CA1
remapping impairment in APP-KI mice.

## Discussion
In this study, using novel APP-KI mice, we for the first time investigated
how the expression of mutated APP gene and resultant Aβ affect the remapping
of neurons in CA1 and the MEC. In old APP-KI mice, we found that the spatial memory
and remapping of CA1 neurons was disrupted. Spatial tuning of MEC neurons, including
grid cells, was severely impaired. By contrast, in young APP-KI mice that do not
show any spatial memory impairment, mild impairments of MEC neurons were found while
CA1 neurons were still intact for both spatial tuning and remapping. These results
are summarized in Fig. S8D .
Thus, answers to our initial questions would be that, (1) yes, the remapping of CA1
place cells was disrupted, and (2) yes, the impairment of remapping in CA1 place
cells accompanied the spatial tuning impairment of MEC neurons, including grid
cells. The alternative hypothesis that the place cell deterioration occurs
independently from impairments in MEC neuron is thus unlikely. Previous anatomical
studies in AD patients showed that neurons in the entorhinal cortex exhibit the
earliest neuronal degeneration ( Van Hoesen et al.,
1991 ; Gomez-Isla et al., 1996 ),
but the functional deterioration of entorhinal neurons and its link to spatial
memory impairment has been unclear. Although impairments in the spatial tuning of
place cells or grid cells were reported ( Cacucci et
al., 2008 ; Kunz et al., 2015 ; Fu et al., 2017 ; Mably et al., 2017 ), no previous studies have
investigated remapping in AD subjects. Our study provides the first circuit-level
evidence that identifies the remapping disruption of hippocampal CA1 neurons,
possibly linked to the impairment of MEC neurons, and as an underlying mechanism for
memory impairment in AD ( Fig.
S8D ).

What are causal relationships between the MEC spatial tuning impairment, CA1
remapping impairment, spatial memory impairments and Aβ plaque formations in
the MEC and CA1 in our APP-KI mice? Previous studies in healthy animals showed that
the manipulation of MEC neuronal activity modulates remapping in CA1 ( Miao et al., 2015 ; Kanter et al., 2017 ), whereas another study showed that
CA1 remapping can occur without inputs from the MEC ( Schlesiger et al., 2018 ). Thus, the mechanism for remapping in the
entorhinal-hippocampal circuit has not been clearly established in healthy subjects.
Importantly, our recording from young APP-KI mice provides the
following clues ( Fig. 8F ): (1) The spatial
tuning impairment was found only in the MEC, but not in CA1; (2) Although Aβ
plaques were already present weakly in CA1, spatial tuning and remapping in CA1 were
not affected in young APP-KI mice; (3) Behavioral memory impairment did not occur
even with the emergence of mild MEC spatial tuning impairment. Taken together, this
line of evidence raises a possibility that the circuit dysfunction progresses in the
direction of MEC→CA1 in the entorhinal-hippocampal circuit. Although
speculative, the following steps may coherently explain our findings: (i) In young
APP-KI mice, Aβ plaques induced by the knock-in expression of mutated APP may
cause the impairment of spatial tuning of MEC neurons including grid cells ( Fig. 8 ), presumably through the deterioration of
network interaction in the MEC ( Moser et al.,
2014 ). (ii) As disease progresses in old APP-KI mice, MEC neurons with
impairment in spatial tuning increase in number ( Fig.
4 ), and remaining neurons with intact remapping property further becomes
reduced ( Fig. 5 ). Note that, because of the
severe disruption of spatial tuning of MEC neurons, it was unclear from our result
if remapping was truly disrupted in the MEC. The spatial tuning impairment in the
MEC may result in the severe remapping impairment of CA1 neurons in old APP-KI mice
( Fig. 2 ), even though the CA1 spatial
tuning is relatively spared ( Fig. 1 ). (iii) The
remapping impairment of CA1 neurons may ultimately result in the behavioral
impairment in spatial memory ( Fig. 1 ). It is
likely that the dysfunction in the CA1, rather than the dysfunction in the MEC, may
be the direct cause for the spatial memory impairment. A pathophysiological
progression in the opposite CA1→MEC direction, or the autonomous emergence of
symptoms in the CA1, would be incompatible with the early emergence of MEC
impairment observed in young APP-KI mice. Our results, however, do not exclude a
possibility that another brain region unexamined in this study causes impairments
observed in the MEC and CA1. Whatever the causality may be, our finding emphasizes
the importance of the entorhinal cortex as a brain region that manifests spatial
tuning impairment earlier than the hippocampus. In the AD research field, the
hippocampus has been the main brain region of interest for decades. Together with a
previous study showing diminished grid cell activity in humans at AD risk ( Kunz et al., 2015 ), our results point to MEC
spatial tuning impairment as a potential “functional biomarker” that
may predict subsequent development of memory impairments in AD. Yet, discrepancy of
pathophysiology can exist between APP-KI mice and AD patients. The combination of
three mutations (Swedish, Iberian and Arctic mutations) harbored in APP-KI mice does
not occur simultaneously in familial AD patients, and AD patients do not harbor
homozygous mutations as used in this study. Importantly, the impairments found in
our APP-KI model need to be thoroughly tested in AD patients.

Consistent with our previous findings showing disrupted fast gamma
oscillations in the MEC of young APP-KI mice ( Nakazono et al., 2017 ), we found that fast gamma oscillations were
disrupted in old APP-KI mice in both the MEC and CA1. The fast gamma coupling
between the MEC and CA1 is also diminished, suggesting impaired signal transfer in
the MEC→CA1 circuit. Together with previous finding of impaired gamma
oscillations in the hippocampus ( Iaccarino et al.,
2016 ; Mably et al., 2017 ), our
results suggest that the reactivation of gamma oscillations may be used as a
potential therapeutic method in AD ( Nakazono et al.,
2018 ). Interestingly, we observed a gap of fast and slow gamma
oscillations around 40 Hz in our WT and APP-KI mice, compared to the border at 50 Hz
in rats ( Colgin et al., 2009 ). There may exist
a species-specific border between slow and fast gamma oscillations in mice.

In healthy animals, neurons in the entorhinal-hippocampal circuit exhibit
two forms of remapping known as “global remapping” and “rate
remapping” ( Leutgeb et al., 2005b ).
When animals move across environments with distinct features, entorhinal grid cells
and hippocampal place cells show distinct patterns of firing (global remapping)
( Muller and Kubie, 1987 ; Fyhn et al., 2007 ). By contrast, when there is only a
slight change in an environment, hippocampal place cells show change in their firing
rate, while keeping the position of firing field constant (rate remapping) ( Leutgeb et al., 2005a ; Leutgeb et al., 2007 ). Although it is likely that both
global remapping and rate remapping are needed for high-precision spatial memory,
disruption of global remapping would completely deprive AD patients of spatial
information about which environment they are currently in. Our results showing the
disruption of global remapping in the hippocampal CA1 of APP-KI mice clearly explain
the devastating impairment of spatial memory in AD patients, who often exhibit the
wandering symptom and cannot discriminate distinct features of surrounding
environments. Future development of techniques to protect or reactivate spatial
tuning and remapping in the entorhinal-hippocampal circuit may lead to therapeutic
methods that can be used to slow the rate of spatial memory decline in AD
patients.

## STAR★METHODS
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should
be directed to and will be fulfilled by the Lead Contact, Kei Igarashi
( kei.igarashi@uci.edu ).

This study did not generate new unique reagents.

Neurophysiological data and analytical codes are available upon
request.

Mice were maintained in standard housing conditions on a 12h
dark/light cycle with food and water provided ad libitum. All procedures
were conducted in accordance with the guidelines of the National Institutes
of Health and approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at
the University of California, Irvine. We previously generated
App NL-G-F/NL-G-F maintained on a C57BL/6 background ( Saito et al., 2014 ). For all
experiments, 28 App NL-G-F/NL-G-F mice (21 males and 7 females)
and 27 App WT/WT mice (18 males and 9 females) between 3 months
and 13 months of age were used. We noted no difference in our preliminary
analyses between sexes. Detailed information about ages when the recording
was performed is in Supplementary Table S1 . Animals were housed in a reversed 12h
dark/light cycle, and all testing occurred during the dark phase. If animals
died or were sick during or before the final test, their recording positions
could not be validated and therefore were removed from the data
analysis.

## METHODS DETAIL
All mice received a custom-built 64-channel drive modified from Liang et
al ( Liang et al., 2017 ) targeting either
CA1 or MEC. For a group of animals, eight tetrodes targeted CA1 of hippocampus
and another eight tetrodes targeted the superficial layer of medial entorhinal
cortex. Tetrodes were constructed from four twisted 17 μm
polyimide-coated platinum-iridium (90%–10%) wires (California Fine Wire).
The electrode tips were plated with gold to reduce electrode impedances to
between 150 and 300 kΩ at 1 kHz. Animals were anesthetized with
isoflurane (air flow: 0.8–1.0 l/min, 1% isoflurane, adjusted according to
physiological condition). The mice received subcutaneous injections of
buprenorphine at the start of the surgery. Depth of anesthesia was examined by
testing tail and pinch reflexes as well as breathing. Upon induction of
anesthesia, the animal was fixed in a Kopf stereotaxic frame for implantation. A
craniotomy was performed centering at AP 2.5 mm ML 2.5 mm from Bregma for
hippocampus (approximately 1 × 1mm) and 0.2–0.4mm anterior to
transverse sinus and ML 3.5mm from midline for medial entorhinal cortex
(approximately 1 × 1mm). The dura was carefully removed, and the tetrodes
were implanted. A stainless-steel screw fixed to skull above the cerebellum
served as the ground electrode. The recording drive was secured to the scratched
skull using dental cement.

Behavioral training started at least 5 days after the surgery and data
collection was performed exactly on the fifth day of the training. All
experiments were conducted in a room containing a 1m-square box made of black
acryl and a polarizing white cue card (216mm × 280mm) and two 1-m long
linear tracks. In the open field task, running was motivated in the 1m-square
box with cookie crumbs thrown randomly into the enclosure. Each session lasted
10 to 20 min. Upon finishing the open field task, animals rested for 5 minutes
and then were tested in the remapping task. The remapping task training required
mice to run in 1-m long linear tracks. Two 1-m long linear tracks were used:
(Track A) Black acryl enclosure with inner wall decorated with patterns of white
cue cards across the track and black rubber floor. (Track B) White acryl
enclosure with inner wall decorated with distinct patterns of black cue signs
across the track and white sandpaper floor. During the remapping task, animals
were trained to run in successive series of Track A → Track B →
Track B → Track A. Two tracks were in the same room. Between the
sessions, animals were given 5 minutes rest. Running was motivated by placing
cookie crumbs on the end positions of the linear tracks. Each session lasted 5
to 10 min. On the linear tracks, the mice ran 10 full laps (back and forth).

LFPs were recorded single-ended using a ground in the skull above the
cerebellum. One mouse without single-ended recording was excluded for LFP
analyses. The tetrodes were connected to a multichannel, impedance matching,
unity gain headstage (Neuralynx). The output of the headstage was conducted to a
data acquisition system (Neuralynx). Unit activity was amplified by a factor of
3000–5000 and band-pass filtered from 600 Hz to 6000 Hz. Spike waveforms
above a threshold set by the experimenter (~55 μV) were
time-stamped and digitized at 32 kHz for 1 ms. LFP signals, 1 per tetrode, were
recorded in the 0–475 Hz frequency band at a sampling rate of 2000 Hz.
Notch filters were not applied. The recording system tracked the position of two
light-emitting diodes (LEDs), one large and one small, on the head stage
(sampling rate 50 Hz) by means of an overhead video camera.

Unless indicated otherwise, analyses were performed using MATLAB codes
kindly provided by Dr. Edvard Moser, or written by the authors ( Igarashi et al., 2014 )

Spike sorting was performed offline using graphical cluster-cutting
software, MClust by Dr. David Redish. Putative excitatory cells were
distinguished from putative interneurons by spike peak-valley width and
average rate ( Bartho et al., 2004 ).
All putative excitatory cells with spike peak-valley width of more than 230
μs and mean firing rates of more than 0.1 Hz (mean firing rate during
all left and right cue sampling intervals) were included for further
analysis. We used this conservative criterion only for selecting putative
principal neurons, but not for selecting interneurons. It should be noted
that neurons with spike peak-valley width of less than 230 μs contain
a certain number of cells with low spike firing frequency, which could
potentially be principal neurons.

Position estimates were based on tracking of the LEDs on the head
stage connected to the recording drive. For rate maps in the random foraging
task, data were speed-filtered; only epochs with instantaneous running
speeds of 1 cm/s or more were included.

To characterize firing fields, the position data were sorted into
one-dimensional 1 cm bins for the linear tracks and 2.5 cm × 2.5 cm
bins for the open field. For the open field map, the path was smoothed with
a 21-sample boxcar window filter (400 ms; 10 samples on each side). Firing
rate distributions were then determined by counting the number of spikes in
each bin as well as the time spent per bin. Maps for number of spikes and
time were smoothed individually using a boxcar average over the surrounding
5 × 5 bins. Weights were distributed as follows: box = [ 0.0025 0.0125 0.0200 0.0125 0.0025 ; … 0.0125 0.0625 0.1000 0.0625 0.0125 ; … 0.0200 0.1000 0.1600 0.1000 0.0200 ; … 0.0125 0.0625 0.1000 0.0625 0.0125 ; … 0.0025 0.0125 0.0200 0.0125 0.0025 ; ]

For each cell, the spatial information score in bits per spike was
calculated from the recordings in the open field task as Spatial Information Score = ∑ i p i λ i λ log 2 λ i λ where λ i is the mean firing rate of a unit in the i th bin, λ is the overall mean firing rate, and p i is the probability of
the animal being in the i th bin (occupancy in the i th bin / total recording time) ( Skaggs et al., 1993 ). An adaptive smoothing
method, introduced by Skaggs et al . (Skaggs et al., 1996),
was used before the calculation of information scores ( Henriksen et al., 2010 ).

A firing field in the open field was estimated as a contiguous
region of at least 7.5 cm × 7.5 cm where the firing rate was above
20% of the peak rate. Low threshold for peak rate was 1 Hz. Additional
fields were identified by deleting the detected field from the rate map and
iterating the search for contiguous firing regions in the remaining part of
the rate map until no additional fields were found. The cell’s peak
rate was estimated as the highest firing rate observed in any bin of the
smoothed rate map. For the linear tracks, a place field was defined as a
contiguous region of at least 4 cm where the firing rate exceeded 20 % of
the peak rate. Low threshold for peak rate was 1 Hz. Additional place fields
were counted only when the peak position of the field was separated from
other fields by more than the width of the field size.

Place cells were defined as cells with spatial information score
above the chance level ( Langston et al.,
2010 ). The chance level was determined in each brain region by a
random permutation procedure using all cells recorded at that time-point in
that region from old WT mice. One hundred permutations were performed for
each cell in the sample. For each permutation trial, the entire sequence of
spikes fired by the cell was time-shifted along the animal’s path by
a random interval between 20 s and 20 s less than the total length of the
trial (usually 600 −20 = 580 s), with the end of the trial wrapped to
the beginning to allow for circular displacements. This procedure allowed
the temporal firing structure to be retained in the shuffled data at the
same time as the spatial structure was lost. Spatial information was then
calculated for each shuffled map. The distribution of spatial information
values across all 100 permutations of all cells in the sample was computed
and finally the 95th percentile was determined. Place cells were defined as
cells with spatial information scores above the 95th percentile of the
distribution from shuffled data for the relevant group.

The structure of all rate maps was evaluated for all cells by
calculating the spatial autocorrelation for each smoothed rate map ( Sargolini et al., 2006 ; Fyhn et al., 2007 ). Autocorrelograms were based
on Pearson’s product moment correlation coefficient with corrections
for edge effects and unvisited locations. With λ ( x , y ) denoting the average rate of a
cell at location ( x , y ), the
autocorrelation between the fields with spatial lags of τ x and τ y was estimated as: r ( τ x , τ y ) = n ∑ λ ( x , y ) λ ( x − τ x , y − τ y ) − ∑ λ ( x , y ) ∑ λ ( x − τ x , y − τ y ) n ∑ λ ( x , y ) 2 − ( ∑ λ ( x , y ) ) 2 n ∑ λ ( x − τ x , y − τ y ) 2 − ( ∑ λ ( x − τ x , y − τ y ) ) 2 where the summation is over all n pixels in λ ( x , y ) for
which rate was estimated for both λ ( x , y ) and λ ( x − τ x , y − τ y ).
Autocorrelations were not estimated for lags of τ x , τ y where n < 20.

The degree of spatial periodicity (‘gridness score’)
was determined for each recorded cell by taking a circular sample of the
autocorrelogram, centered on the central peak but with the central peak
excluded, and comparing rotated versions of this sample. The Pearson
correlation of this circle with its rotation in α degrees was
obtained for angles of 60° and 120° on one side and
30°, 90° and 150° on the other. The cell’s
gridness score was defined as the minimum difference between any of the
elements in the first group and any of the elements in the second. The
radius of the excluded central peak was defined as either the first local
minimum in a curve showing correlation as a function of average distance
from the center, or as the first incidence where the correlation was
negative, whichever occurred first.

Grid cells were defined as cells in which rotational symmetry-based
gridness scores exceeded the 95th percentile of a distribution of grid
scores for shuffled recordings from the entire population of cells obtained
from old WT mice. Shuffling was performed in the same way as for place
cells, i.e. for each permutation trial, the entire sequence of spikes fired
by the cell was time-shifted along the animal’s path by a random
interval between 20 s and 20 s less than the length of the trial (usually
600 – 20 = 580 s), with the end of the trial wrapped to the
beginning. The shuffling procedure was repeated 100 times for each of the
cells in the sample. For each permutation, a firing rate map and an
autocorrelation map were constructed and a grid score was calculated. Grid
scores were computed for all permutations for all cells and the 95th
percentile was read out from the overall distribution. Grid cells were
defined as cells with grid scores higher than the 95th percentile of the
grid scores of the distribution for the shuffled data.

Recently, an alternative method for shuffling spatial information
and gridness score was introduced using single-cell data for defining
spatially-tuned cells and grid cells ( Diehl
et al., 2017 ). We reanalyzed our data using this method ( Fig. S9 ). Our result
showed that, in CA1, the spatially tuned neurons did not differ in number
between WT and APP-KI mice in both young and old mice (P>0.05,
Wilcoxon rank sum test, Fig. S9A1 ). However, in the MEC, spatially tuned cells, as well
as grid cells, were reduced in both young and old APP-KI mice (P<0.05
or better, Wilcoxon rank sum test, Fig. S9 A 1 ). The
analysis also confirmed the notion that the deterioration of spatially tuned
cells in young APP-KI mice appeared only in MEC ( Fig. S9A 4 ).

Remapping analysis was performed as described previously ( Miao et al., 2015 ). For experiments on
the linear track, instantaneous firing rates on individual laps were
estimated using a Gaussian kernel on the spike data for temporal smoothing: r ( t ) = ∑ i = 1 N g ( t i − t h ) where g is a 1D Gaussian kernel, h is bandwidth, N is the
total number of spikes, and t i is the time of the i th spike. The bandwidth was set at 100 ms. Due to minimal coverage per bin,
temporal smoothing gives more robust rate estimates compared to those based
on spatial bins during fast running on the track. Spike rate at each track
position (1 cm bin) on each lap was estimated using a linear interpolation
method applied to the temporally-smoothed spike rates. Because the same
cells often had different firing fields on left and right runs, firing
fields of the same cell in each run direction were analyzed as two distinct
data sets. A segment of 5 cm was excluded from each end of the linear track
for analysis.

Spatial correlation was obtained by calculating the Pearson
correlation coefficient for mean firing rates across 1 cm wide bins from the
track on a pair of sessions. For population vector analysis, population
vectors were defined for each 3.6-cm bin of rate maps (25 bins in total)
from all cells in the experimental group. To maintain independence of
neighboring spatial bins, we estimated mean firing rates in spatial bins
without smoothing. For lap-by-lap population vector analyses, a total of 10
laps (defined as pairs of forward and backward runs) were taken from each
recording session. Population vector correlations were determined for each
spatial bin of each lap.

The age-dependent progression of impairment in behavioral context
discrimination, impaired spatial tuning, impaired remapping found in our
results were plotted for CA1 and MEC. In these plots, Impairment
Index (II) was defined as following: Each functional property
(spatial tuning score for spatial tuning, PVec correlation for remapping and
Discrimination Index for context discrimination) obtained from APP-KI mice
was first normalized by the that obtained from age-matched WT mice. This
ratio was then subtracted from 1 ( II = 1 − APP-KI /
WT) so that II become 0 if there is no impairment and II become 1 if the functional property is completely
impaired. We used the normalization by age-matched WT, rather than just
normalizing by old mice data, in order to take age effects into
consideration. For Aβ plaque where no data are available for
correcting age effect, percent areas with Aβ plaque in young APP-KI
mice were plotted so that the values obtained from the same area in old mice
become 1 ( II Aβ =
Aβ plaque area / Aβ plaque area old ).

Animals with single-ended LFP recordings were used for the analysis.

Time-resolved power across frequencies was computed using a wavelet
transform method. Signals were convolved by a family of complex
Morlet’s wavelets w ( t , f ), one for each frequency, as a function of time: w ( t , f ) = A exp ( − t 2 / σ t 2 ) exp ( 2 i π ft ) in which the family of wavelets was characterized by a
constant ratio f / σ f ,
which was set to 7, and with σ f =
½π σ t .
The coefficient A was set at: ( σ t σ ) − 1 / 2 in order to normalize the wavelets such that their total
energy was equal to 1.

To control for impedance differences between tetrodes, LFP power was
normalized, for each tetrode, to the total power in 1–100 Hz
band.

An acausal (zero phase shift), frequency domain, finite impulse
response bandpass filter was applied to the signals. For theta filtering, 5
and 6 Hz were chosen for the stopband and passband, respectively, for the
low cut-off frequencies; 10 and 11 Hz were chosen for passband and stopband
high cut-off frequencies. For filtering of gamma oscillations, 19 and 20 Hz
were chosen for the stopband and passband, respectively, for the low cut-off
frequencies; 90 and 91 Hz were chosen for passband and stopband high cut-off
frequencies. For filtering of slow gamma oscillations, 19 and 20 Hz were
chosen for the stopband and passband, respectively, for the low cut-off
frequencies; 40 and 41 Hz were chosen for passband and stopband high cut-off
frequencies. For filtering of fast gamma oscillations, 39 and 40 Hz were
chosen for the stopband and passband, respectively, for the low cut-off
frequencies; 90 and 91 Hz were chosen for passband and stopband high cut-off
frequencies.

Theta cycles were selected by bandpass filtering the signal from
6–10 Hz and selecting local minima in the filtered signal (i.e.,
θ(t − 1) > θ(t) and θ(t + 1) >
θ(t)). Segments of the recording were collected and defined as a
theta cycle if the time between detected points fell within a range
criterion that corresponded to the period of an ~8 Hz theta cycle
(i.e. 125 ± 25 ms). Local minima of detected theta cycles were
required to be separated by at least 100 ms.

To extract periods of gamma oscillatory activity in the LFP, we
first computed time-varying power within the frequency bands for each
recording. Power at each time point was averaged across the frequency range
to obtain time-varying estimates of oscillatory power. Time points were
collected when the power exceeded 2 SD of the time-averaged power. Time
windows, 160 ms in length, were cut around the identified time points. In
each 160 ms segment, the maxima of gamma oscillatory amplitude were
determined from the gamma bandpass filtered versions of the recordings.
Duplicated gamma oscillatory periods, a common consequence of extracting
overlapping time windows, were avoided by discarding identical maxima values
within a given gamma oscillatory subtype and further requiring that maxima
of a given subtype be separated by at least 100 ms. Individual gamma
oscillatory windows were finally constructed from the original, non-bandpass
filtered recordings as 400 ms long windows centered around the gamma
oscillatory amplitude maxima.

LFP recordings were bandpass-filtered in the theta range
(6–10 Hz), and theta phases for each time point were estimated using
the Hilbert transform function from the Signal Processing Toolbox in MATLAB.
Theta phases at the time points associated with gamma maxima (determined as
described above) as well as theta phases for spikes were collected. Theta
phases for each gamma oscillatory event were sorted into 30° bins,
allowing the phase distribution of each event to be determined. For a given
recording, the distributions of gamma oscillations were normalized by
dividing the bins by the total number of gamma oscillatory episodes within a
given recording. In this analysis, and in all analyses involving oscillation
phase, the oscillation peak was defined as 0°.

Time-varying power in 2-Hz-wide frequency bands, from 2 Hz to 140
Hz, was obtained for individual theta cycles using the wavelet transform
method described above. Time frequency representations for multiple theta
cycles recorded from the same site and session within the same animal were
then averaged using the theta phase, and then normalized using the total
average power in the individual 2-Hz bin across the phase ( Schomburg et al., 2014 ).

The theta phase at the time of gamma oscillation maxima occurrence
was calculated by bandpass-filtering the LFP in the theta range, performing
a Hilbert transform on the filtered signal, and then locating theta phase of
individual gamma oscillation maxima. Resultant vectors were calculated from
the phase distributions of gamma maxima. Lengths of resultant vectors were
used as an index for the strength of theta-gamma coupling.

Neurons recorded in animals with single-ended LFP recordings were
used for the analysis. The oscillatory phase at the time of spike occurrence
was estimated. This was performed by first bandpass-filtering the LFP,
performing a Hilbert transform on the filtered signal, and then extracting
the phase component at the spike times. Cells were considered to be
phase-locked if their phase distribution differed significantly from a
uniform distribution (P < 0.05, Rayleigh test). Resultant vectors
were calculated from the distributions of phase component. Lengths of
resultant vectors were used as an index for the strength of
phase-locking.

Coherence was computed using a multitaper method from the Chronux
open source MATLAB toolbox ( http://chronux.org/ ). We used 3 for time-bandwidth product
and 5 for the number of tapers.

All 200 ms time windows of LFP with fast gamma episodes in CA1 were
extracted and averaged. Corresponding LFP time windows from the MEC were
then extracted and averaged. Power of fast gamma oscillations were
calculated from these averaged traces, and then MEC:CA1 power ratio was
calculated.

Electrode positions were confirmed by anaesthetizing the drive-implanted
mice using isoflurane and performing small electrolytic lesions through passing
current (10 μA for 20 s) through the electrodes. Immediately after this,
the mice received an overdose of isoflurane and were perfused intracardially
with saline followed by 4% freshly depolymerized paraformaldehyde in phosphate
buffer (PFA). The brains were extracted and stored in the same fixative
overnight. After overnight cryoprotection in phosphate buffer saline with 30%
sucrose at 4°C, tissue samples were embedded in O.C.T. mounting medium
and sagittal sections (40 μm) were cut and stained with cresyl violet.
All tetrodes were identified, and the tip of each electrode was found by
comparison with adjacent sections. Only data from tetrodes in the hippocampal
CA1 or the layer 2/3 of dorsal MEC was collected for analysis. The electrical
lesions often made tip holes in the brain section larger so that they span
across cell layers. To ensure that the LFP was recorded from cell layers (either
in pyramidal cell layer in CA1 or layers 2/3 in the MEC) we used LFP data only
from tetrodes that had spiking activity of principal neurons for LFP
analyses.

For immunostaining, sections were rinsed 3 times for 10 min in 1 x PBS
(pH 7.6) at room temperature, preincubated for 1 hr in 10% normal goat serum in
PBST (1 x PBS with 0.5% Triton X-100). Between incubation steps, sections were
rinsed in PBST. Sections were incubated with antibodies against Aβ,
raised in mouse (MCSA1, Medimabs, 1:1000) for 24 hr in antibody-blocking buffer
at 4°C. After three 15 min washes in PBST at room temperature, sections
were incubated in a goat-anti mouse antibody conjugated with Alexa Fluor 568nm
(Invitrogen, 1:250) for 2 hr at room temperature. After rinsing in PBS, sections
were mounted onto glass slides with 40 ,60 -diamidino-2-phenylindole
(DAPI)-containing Vectashield mounting medium (Vector Laboratories), and a
coverslip was applied. Digital photomicrographs were acquired with an Olympus
BX53 fluorescent microscope equipped with a digital camera.

For amyloid beta plaque counting analysis, 500μm by 500 μm
block images representing the recorded areas in CA1 or MEC were taken from the
original section. All blocks were taken from sagittal sections. For CA1, four
blocks from each animal were taken spanning 2.2 – 3.2mm lateral to
midline. For the medial entorhinal cortex, four blocks from each animal were
taken spanning 2.8 – 3.8mm lateral to midline. Blocks were taken from
dorsal aspect of each region and they were chosen to reflect our recording
positions. The areas of pixels with fluorescence values higher than two standard
deviations of background were quantified for all blocks using Image J software,
and then divided by the whole area of the image for percent Aβ plaque.
Data from eight blocks from two mice were used for each area/genotype/age. All
analyses were performed in a blind manner.

We used a context discrimination task for mice used in McHugh et al (2007) . Four male and four female mice
from each group (WT and APP-KI) between 3–5 months old for young group
and 12–13 months old for old group were used in this experiment. All
experiments were conducted and analyzed by scientists blind to the genotypes of
the animals. The mice were caged in single housing at least one week prior to
the experiment to become acclimatized. The mice were housed in plastic tubs and
had ad libitum access to food and water and lived on a 12:12 hour dark/light
cycle. All procedures occurred during the dark cycle. During fear conditioning,
the mice received three days of conditioning in Context A before the
discrimination phase of the task began, allowing for greater generalization in
both genotypes of mice. Context A chamber consisted of black Plexiglas side
walls while the front door, back wall, and ceiling were made of clear Plexiglas.
The floor of each chamber consisted of 33 stainless steel rods, separated by 6
mm, which were wired to a shock generator and scrambler. A stainless steel pan
coated with isobenzaldehyde in 100% alcohol (0.25% concentration) was placed
under the grid floor in each box to provide a distinct odor. Each chamber was
cleaned thoroughly with an odorless 5% sodium hydroxide solution before the
animals were placed in the chambers. The overhead fluorescent room lights
remained on. Context B chamber consisted of Plexiglas side walls sloped inward
at a 60 degrees angle from the floor (28 × 21 × 21 cm). As in
context A, the floor of each chamber consisted of 33 stainless steel rods,
separated by 6 mm, which were wired to a shock generator and scrambler. This
context was cleaned and scented with a 1% acetic acid solution. The room was lit
with a 30-W red overhead light and a 30-W red light located in the corner of the
room opposite the chambers.

Each day, the animals were transported to a room adjacent to the
experimental room. They were left undisturbed for at least 20 min. On days
1–3 the mice were carried to the A-context conditioning room in their
home tub and placed into the conditioning chambers. After 192sec, they
received a single foot shock (2 sec; 0.65mA) and were removed from the
chambers 1min following foot shock termination.

Across the subsequent two consecutive days (day 1 and 2 of
familiarization), mice were placed into the A-context and B-context
conditioning chambers in separate tests (counterbalanced order). Each
session consisted of an 8-minute exposure to the chamber without the
delivery of foot shock.

On days 1 through 5 of discrimination training, mice were exposed to
both A-context and B-context conditioning chambers daily. The order of
exposure on each day followed a BAABA design such that on days 2, 3 and 5
all animals were exposed to Chamber A first and Chamber B second. Across the
entire discrimination phase, all animals received a single foots hock during
each Chamber A exposure and never received foot shock during Chamber B
exposures. The dependent measure employed was freezing behavior, defined as
behavioral immobility except for movement necessary for respiration
(Fanselow et al., J Biol Sci 1980). An observer, blind to the genotypes of
the mice, scored each mouse as either freezing or not freezing every 8 s for
the duration of each 192 s in each context on each day during spatial
discrimination training. These scores were then converted into a percentage
of observations spent freezing. Discrimination Index were calculated for
discrimination training using these freezing percentage scores according to
the following formula: (Chamber A − Chamber B)/(Chamber A + Chamber
B).

All statistical testing assumed a non-parametric distribution and the
Wilcoxon rank sum test was used. For comparing the distribution of place cells
and grid cells, Kolmogorov-Smirnov (KS) tests were applied. All statistical
methods used are summarized in Supplementary Tables S2 . All data are represented as mean ±
SEM.