# Title
Age-dependent instability of mature neuronal fate in induced neurons from Alzheimer’s patients

# Abstract
Sporadic Alzheimer’s disease (AD) exclusively affects elderly people. Using direct conversion of AD patient fibroblasts into induced neurons (iNs), we generated an age-equivalent neuronal model. AD patient-derived iNs exhibit strong neuronal transcriptome signatures characterized by downregulation of mature neuronal properties and upregulation of immature and progenitor-like signaling pathways. Mapping iNs to longitudinal neuronal differentiation trajectory data demonstrated that AD iNs reflect a hypo-mature neuronal identity characterized by markers of stress, cell cycle, and de-differentiation. Epigenetic landscape profiling revealed an underlying aberrant neuronal state that shares similarities with malignant transformation and age-dependent epigenetic erosion. To probe for the involvement of aging, we generated rejuvenated iPSC-derived neurons that showed no significant disease-related transcriptome signatures, a feature that is consistent with epigenetic clock and brain ontogenesis mapping, which indicate that fibroblast-derived iNs more closely reflect old adult brain stages. Our findings identify AD-related neuronal changes as age-dependent cellular programs that impair neuronal identity.

## Introduction
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) exclusively affects the elderly, and an understanding of the interface between aging and disease development is crucial for developing therapeutic strategies ( Pistollato et al., 2016 ; Scheltens et al., 2016 ). In familial AD, the origin of pathology lies with mutation-induced protein misprocessing; historically the focus of research has been on transgenic models for familial AD and on the characterization of the roles of toxic species of misprocessed peptides and proteins ( Ittner and Götz, 2011 ), leaving sporadic human-specific and age-dependent disease mechanisms relatively underexplored ( Zetterberg and Mattsson, 2014 ). However, familial AD is comparatively rare, and sporadic AD cases that develop without clear genetic etiology represent the vast majority of cases, wherein disease risk increases exponentially with age ( Querfurth and LaFerla, 2010 ). Because of this incomplete understanding of age-dependent AD pathogenesis, no effective treatments are available ( Alzheimer’s Association, 2015 ; Golde et al., 2018 ).

Differentiated neurons are postmitotic cells that are born mainly during embryogenesis and thus must preserve their identity, function, and resilience over decades. The phenomenon of age-related epigenetic erosion has been described as a loosening of a cell’s grip on its epigenetic identity ( Ma et al., 2018 ; Teschendorff et al., 2013 ; Wang et al., 2008 ; Zheng et al., 2016a ). During cell specification in development, and prior to regeneration following injury, cellular de-differentiation occurs in response to stress or injury ( Jopling et al., 2010 ; Wagner et al., 2017 ). Recent evidence indicates that the loss of cell identity is involved in neuronal vulnerability and neurodegeneration ( Ayata et al., 2018 ; Poplawski et al., 2020 ; Renthal et al., 2020 ; von Schimmelmann et al., 2016 ). Also, evidence from familial AD induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-derived neurons and from post-mortem AD brains indicates that early in disease progression, these neurons show signs of de-differentiating back toward progenitor-like fates, develop signs of cell cycle re-entry, become dysfunctional, and lack the resilience of mature neurons ( Arendt, 2012 ; Koffie et al., 2011 ; Kole et al., 2013 ; Mattson and Magnus, 2006 ).

Human stem cell technology enables us to generate virtually any human cell type from patient-specific iPSCs ( Takahashi et al., 2007 ), and iPSC-based models represent an attractive approach for studying AD ( Israel et al., 2012 ; Koch et al., 2012 ; Mertens et al., 2013a , 2013b ; Young et al., 2015 ). However, reprogramming into pluripotency leaves old, donor-derived iPSC-derived neurons with practically no traces of their donors’ ages, and iPSC-associated cellular rejuvenation represents a major challenge when attempting to model age-dependent diseases ( Böhnke et al., 2018 ; Kang et al., 2016 ; Mertens et al., 2015a ; Miller et al., 2013 ; Tang et al., 2017 ). Thus, similar to short-lived animal models, iPSC neurons do not account for human age as a major contributing risk factor. They are also known to exhibit a fetal neuronal identity that might not be optimally suited to model all disease-relevant phenotypes ( Arbab et al., 2014 ; Luo et al., 2016 ; Patterson et al., 2012 ). In contrast, direct conversion of human fibroblasts into induced neurons (iNs) bypasses the embryo-like state and directly results in postmitotic neurons with mature marker expression and functionality ( Liu et al., 2013 ; Pang et al., 2011 ). Fibroblast-derived iNs preserve substantial signatures of human aging, including transcriptomic, nuclear pore, mitochondrial, epigenetic, and other aspects of aging ( Herdy et al., 2019 ; Huh et al., 2016 ; Kim et al., 2018 ; Mertens et al., 2015a ; Traxler et al., 2019 ).

Because aging is likely crucial for age-related neurodegenerative diseases to unfold, we generated age-equivalent fibroblast-derived iNs from a cohort of primarily sporadic AD patients and cognitively normal controls. Our data indicate that a hypo-mature cellular program in AD iNs leads to the loss of specialized neuronal functions and resilience and might underlie many of the pathological changes seen in neurons in AD brains.

## Results
We generated age-equivalent iNs using transcription factor-based neuronal conversion from fibroblasts starting from an extensively characterized cohort containing 16 AD subjects (13 sporadic, 3 familial) and 19 age- and sex-matched, non-demented control donors ( Figures 1 A and 1B; Figure S1 ; Tables S1 and S2 ; Ladewig et al., 2012 ; Mertens et al., 2015a ). Ngn2/Ascl1-based, small molecule-enhanced iN conversion and subsequent polysialylated neural cell adhesion molecule (PSA-NCAM) fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) isolation resulted in cultures of ∼90% βIII-tubulin-positive neuronal cells that readily expressed NeuN ( Figures 1 C–1E). These functionally active cultures consisted primarily of glutamatergic (vGlut1 + ) neurons and a minor fraction of GABA + neurons ( Figures 1 F and 1G; Figure S1 ). To characterize the generated iNs, we profiled the transcriptomes of iNs and fibroblasts using whole-genome mRNA sequencing (RNA-seq) ( Figure S1 ). Consistent with the immunocytochemistry and results from previous studies ( Kim et al., 2018 ; Vadodaria et al., 2016 ), we detected expression of both glutamatergic and GABAergic marker genes in the iNs ( Figure 1 H). Familial AD, but not sporadic AD, is caused by mutations in amyloid precursor protein (APP) and presenilin (PSEN) genes that lead to aberrant gamma-secretase function and to elevated Aβ42/40 ratios ( Elobeid et al., 2016 ; Zetterberg and Mattsson, 2014 ). As expected, only iNs from the familial AD patients showed increased Aβ42/40 ratios in conditioned media ( Figure 1 I). Figure 1 Induced neurons (iNs) from a cohort of AD patients and controls (A and B) Generation of fibroblast-derived iNs (A) from a cohort of mostly sporadic AD patients and age-matched controls (B). (C) Phase contrast and immunofluorescence images for vimentin, βIII-tubulin, and NeuN. Scale bars, 100 μm. (D–G) Quantification of immunofluorescence images for βIII-tubulin/DAPI pre- and post-FACS isolation for PSA-NCAM (D), NeuN/ βIII-tubulin (E), vGlut1/MAP2 (F), and GABA/βIII-tubulin (G) of control and AD iNs; 3 weeks conversion. Circles, subjects. Bars, mean ± SD. (H) Glutamatergic and GABAergic marker gene expression in iNs, fibroblasts, and prefrontal cortex (PFC) samples. Green, low expression, and red, high expression, based on variance stabilizing transformation (vst)-normalized counts. (I) ELISA Aβ 42/40 ratios in FACS-purified young (n = 3), old control (n = 10), sporadic AD (n = 9), and familial AD (n = 2) subject-derived iNs; 4 weeks conversion. Bars, mean ± SD. ∗∗∗ p < 0.0001 (one-way ANOVA). See also Figure S1 and Tables S1 and S2 .

Induced neurons (iNs) from a cohort of AD patients and controls

(A and B) Generation of fibroblast-derived iNs (A) from a cohort of mostly sporadic AD patients and age-matched controls (B).

(C) Phase contrast and immunofluorescence images for vimentin, βIII-tubulin, and NeuN. Scale bars, 100 μm.

(D–G) Quantification of immunofluorescence images for βIII-tubulin/DAPI pre- and post-FACS isolation for PSA-NCAM (D), NeuN/ βIII-tubulin (E), vGlut1/MAP2 (F), and GABA/βIII-tubulin (G) of control and AD iNs; 3 weeks conversion. Circles, subjects. Bars, mean ± SD.

(H) Glutamatergic and GABAergic marker gene expression in iNs, fibroblasts, and prefrontal cortex (PFC) samples. Green, low expression, and red, high expression, based on variance stabilizing transformation (vst)-normalized counts.

(I) ELISA Aβ 42/40 ratios in FACS-purified young (n = 3), old control (n = 10), sporadic AD (n = 9), and familial AD (n = 2) subject-derived iNs; 4 weeks conversion. Bars, mean ± SD. ∗∗∗ p < 0.0001 (one-way ANOVA).

See also Figure S1 and Tables S1 and S2 .

To evaluate AD-specific signatures in our model, we calculated the differentially expressed (DE) genes between control and AD iNs as well as those of their parental fibroblasts. Unsurprisingly, fibroblasts did not display any significant AD-specific DE genes, whereas 778 highly significant (false discovery rate [FDR] < 0.01) DE genes were identified in iNs ( Figure 2 A; Table S3 ). Gene expression differences between the groups largely aligned with clinical diagnosis, whereas other classifiers did not appear to bias the detected DE genes ( Figure 2 B). The validity of the DE genes was evidenced by a clear separation of control and AD iNs by t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (tSNE) that largely confirmed the presence of an AD-specific transcriptome signature that unified most patient iN samples, despite some heterogeneity driven by four outlier samples ( Figure 2 C). Published post-mortem transcriptome data from AD and control brain transcriptome studies have previously identified genes up- or downregulated in AD, and we tested for concordance between these genes and AD iNs ( Allen et al., 2016 ; Annese et al., 2018 ; Blalock et al., 2003 , 2011 ; Mills et al., 2013 ; Wu et al., 2005 ). Indeed, the gene sets that were previously found to be downregulated in AD brains were typically also downregulated in AD iNs, and upregulated gene sets were also upregulated in AD iNs ( Figure 2 D; Table S4 ). A majority of genes were regulated in the same direction. Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) of overlapping AD genes showed that they were enriched for mature neuronal categories such as synaptic transmission and oxidative phosphorylation (downregulated; Figure 2 E) and response to stress, regulation of cell proliferation, and pathways in cancer (upregulated; Figure 2 F). Because bulk brain samples consist of diverse cell types, we compared AD iNs with single-nucleus RNA-seq data from AD and control brains ( Figure 2 G; Grubman et al., 2019 ). AD iNs consistently showed the highest overlap with, and the best correlation to, the neuronal cell-type-specific AD signatures ( Figure 2 H), with downregulated synapse-related and upregulated stress-related gene categories commonly visible in both systems ( Figure 2 I). These data indicate that known characteristics of AD, including functional neuronal failure, stress response, and cell cycle re-entry, are reflected in AD iNs. Figure 2 AD-specific transcriptome signatures in patient-derived iNs (A) Volcano plot for control versus AD DE genes in fibroblasts (n = 16 versus 17) and iNs (n = 15 versus 13). (B and C) Heatmap for highly significant (padj < 0.01) AD iN DE genes of control and AD iNs (B) and tSNE clustering on the basis of these genes (C). (D) Heatmap showing average gene expression changes of previously published down- and upregulated post-mortem AD gene sets in iNs. (E and F) Gene set enrichment analyses of downregulated (E) and upregulated (F) genes that are commonly changed in the same direction in AD iNs and post-mortem brain. Pie charts depict fractions of overlapping genes, and bar graphs show gene sets from the top 10 (by FDR) of each category. (G) Schematic drawing summarizing single-nucleus RNA-seq (snRNA-seq) AD DE analysis in post-mortem neurons, oligodendrocytes, microglia, astrocytes, and oligodendrocyte precursor cells (OPCs) ( Grubman et al., 2019 ). Venn diagram showing overlapping and cell-type-exclusive AD DE genes for the individual cell types. (H) Comparison of AD iN transcriptomes with snRNA-seq cell types. Heatmap shows the fractions of overlapping cell-type-specific and cell-type-exclusive genes and linear regression slope and fit values. (I) GSEA of down- and upregulated genes that are commonly changed in the same direction in AD iNs and post-mortem snRNA-seq neurons. Bar graphs show gene sets from within the top 10 (by FDR) of each category. See also Figures S1 and S2 and Tables S3 and S4 .

AD-specific transcriptome signatures in patient-derived iNs

(A) Volcano plot for control versus AD DE genes in fibroblasts (n = 16 versus 17) and iNs (n = 15 versus 13).

(B and C) Heatmap for highly significant (padj < 0.01) AD iN DE genes of control and AD iNs (B) and tSNE clustering on the basis of these genes (C).

(D) Heatmap showing average gene expression changes of previously published down- and upregulated post-mortem AD gene sets in iNs.

(E and F) Gene set enrichment analyses of downregulated (E) and upregulated (F) genes that are commonly changed in the same direction in AD iNs and post-mortem brain. Pie charts depict fractions of overlapping genes, and bar graphs show gene sets from the top 10 (by FDR) of each category.

(G) Schematic drawing summarizing single-nucleus RNA-seq (snRNA-seq) AD DE analysis in post-mortem neurons, oligodendrocytes, microglia, astrocytes, and oligodendrocyte precursor cells (OPCs) ( Grubman et al., 2019 ). Venn diagram showing overlapping and cell-type-exclusive AD DE genes for the individual cell types.

(H) Comparison of AD iN transcriptomes with snRNA-seq cell types. Heatmap shows the fractions of overlapping cell-type-specific and cell-type-exclusive genes and linear regression slope and fit values.

(I) GSEA of down- and upregulated genes that are commonly changed in the same direction in AD iNs and post-mortem snRNA-seq neurons. Bar graphs show gene sets from within the top 10 (by FDR) of each category.

See also Figures S1 and S2 and Tables S3 and S4 .

We next probed for the functional implications encoded in the AD iN DE genes. GSEA indicated that gene categories enriched in the most significantly (padj < 0.01) downregulated AD genes covered a semantic space around nervous system development, neuronal action potential, synaptic transmission, ion transport, and mitochondria ( Figure 3 A). These top-ranked categories were also enriched within downregulated genes in post mortem AD, further indicating a loss of genes promoting the differentiation of neurons ( Figure 3 B; Table S5 ). Then we tested representative, previously defined mature neuronal gene sets and corresponding marker genes, including synaptic plasticity and NRFS/REST targets, that were markedly downregulated in AD iNs ( Figures 4 C and 4D; Kim et al., 2015 ; Satoh et al., 2013 ). On the basis of these marker genes, we did not observe systematic differences between iNs from sporadic and familial AD patients ( Figure S1 ). Consistent with the transcriptional changes, PSA-NCAM-positive FACS-purified AD iN cultures displayed less complex dendritic morphologies, as revealed by βIII-tubulin-based reconstructions ( Figures 3 E and 3F). No signs of increased neuronal cell death were detected in AD iNs under standard culture conditions (not shown). Furthermore, the density of synapsin-positive and synapsin/PSD-95 co-labeled synapse-like structures along the neurites of AD iNs was significantly reduced compared with control iNs ( Figures 3 G and 3H). We used GcAMP6m-based live-cell Ca 2+ imaging to assess spontaneous neuronal activity, and we detected a reduced frequency of Ca 2+ neuronal activity events in AD iNs ( Figures 3 I and 3J). Although it is commonly believed that neuronal changes in AD are the result of an accumulation of damaging agents, these data indicate that a lack of a fully differentiated neuronal transcription might underlie impaired neuronal functionality. Figure 3 AD iNs downregulate mature neuronal features (A) Enriched GO terms in significantly downregulated AD iN genes in redundancy-trimmed semantic space. (B) Top significantly enriched GO terms within significant AD iN downregulated genes and enrichment of the same and similar gene sets in bulk and AD brain data and in snRNA-seq AD neurons. (C) Violin plot showing expression changes in control versus AD iNs of published gene sets that represent mature neuronal identity. Significance values for each gene set are based on comparison with fibroblast and iPSC-iNs from the same cohort ( Figures S5 H and S5I). (D) Bar graphs showing fold changes and significance of downregulated mature neuronal marker genes in AD versus control iNs. All marker genes are part of mature neuronal gene sets in (C). (E) Neuronal morphology reconstruction images of representative control and AD iN cultures. (F) Morphological complexity scores of control (n = 8) and AD iNs (n = 8). Circles, subjects. Bars, mean ± SD; unpaired t test. (G) Immunostaining for synapsin/PSD-95 co-localization along iN neurites following 4 weeks of conversion. Black arrows, double-labeled punctae; white arrows, single-labeled puncta, white box, magnified field; scale bar, 100 μm. (H) Quantification of synaptic densities by synapsin punctae and synapsin/PSD-95 co-localized punctae in control (n = 7) and AD (n = 7) iNs. Circles, subjects. Bars, mean ± SD, unpaired t test. (I) Ca 2+ event number in control (n = 160 cells; five donors) and AD neurons (n = 184 cells; five donors). Violin plot; Kruskal-Wallis test. ∗∗ p < 0.01. (J) Ca 2+ event distribution of control and AD iN samples. ∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, and ∗∗∗ p < 0.001. See also Table S5 . Figure 4 Activation of immature neuronal and cellular transformation-like signatures in AD iNs (A) Enriched GO terms in significantly upregulated AD iN genes in redundancy-trimmed semantic space. (B and C) Top significantly enriched GO terms (B) and KEGG pathways (C) within significant AD iN upregulated genes and enrichment of the same gene sets in post-mortem AD brain data. (D) Violin plots showing expression changes in control versus AD iNs of representative published gene sets. Significance values for each gene set are based on comparison with fibroblast and iPSC-iNs from the same cohort ( Figures S5 H and S5I). (E) Bar graphs showing the fold changes and significance of upregulated de-differentiation marker genes in AD versus control iNs. All marker genes are part of the dysregulated gene sets in (D). (F) Similarity profiles of AD and control iNs to the neuronal differentiation trajectory represented as linear regression fit and standard error (shaded regions). The neuronal differentiation trajectory is based on longitudinal mRNA-seq of iPSC-derived neural stem cell (NSC) differentiation into neurons (n = 3 iPSC donor lines) ( Schafer et al., 2019 ). (G) Gene interaction map and expression fold changes (bar graphs) of neuronal differentiation trajectory genes. Left and top: up in AD iNs and down in differentiation. Right and bottom: down in AD iNs and up in differentiation. Colored nodes in interaction map indicate cell cycle, synapse, and ion channel genes. See also Figure S3 and Table S5 .

AD iNs downregulate mature neuronal features

(A) Enriched GO terms in significantly downregulated AD iN genes in redundancy-trimmed semantic space.

(B) Top significantly enriched GO terms within significant AD iN downregulated genes and enrichment of the same and similar gene sets in bulk and AD brain data and in snRNA-seq AD neurons.

(C) Violin plot showing expression changes in control versus AD iNs of published gene sets that represent mature neuronal identity. Significance values for each gene set are based on comparison with fibroblast and iPSC-iNs from the same cohort ( Figures S5 H and S5I).

(D) Bar graphs showing fold changes and significance of downregulated mature neuronal marker genes in AD versus control iNs. All marker genes are part of mature neuronal gene sets in (C).

(E) Neuronal morphology reconstruction images of representative control and AD iN cultures.

(F) Morphological complexity scores of control (n = 8) and AD iNs (n = 8). Circles, subjects. Bars, mean ± SD; unpaired t test.

(G) Immunostaining for synapsin/PSD-95 co-localization along iN neurites following 4 weeks of conversion. Black arrows, double-labeled punctae; white arrows, single-labeled puncta, white box, magnified field; scale bar, 100 μm.

(H) Quantification of synaptic densities by synapsin punctae and synapsin/PSD-95 co-localized punctae in control (n = 7) and AD (n = 7) iNs. Circles, subjects. Bars, mean ± SD, unpaired t test.

(I) Ca 2+ event number in control (n = 160 cells; five donors) and AD neurons (n = 184 cells; five donors). Violin plot; Kruskal-Wallis test. ∗∗ p < 0.01.

(J) Ca 2+ event distribution of control and AD iN samples.

∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, and ∗∗∗ p < 0.001. See also Table S5 .

Activation of immature neuronal and cellular transformation-like signatures in AD iNs

(A) Enriched GO terms in significantly upregulated AD iN genes in redundancy-trimmed semantic space.

(B and C) Top significantly enriched GO terms (B) and KEGG pathways (C) within significant AD iN upregulated genes and enrichment of the same gene sets in post-mortem AD brain data.

(D) Violin plots showing expression changes in control versus AD iNs of representative published gene sets. Significance values for each gene set are based on comparison with fibroblast and iPSC-iNs from the same cohort ( Figures S5 H and S5I).

(E) Bar graphs showing the fold changes and significance of upregulated de-differentiation marker genes in AD versus control iNs. All marker genes are part of the dysregulated gene sets in (D).

(F) Similarity profiles of AD and control iNs to the neuronal differentiation trajectory represented as linear regression fit and standard error (shaded regions). The neuronal differentiation trajectory is based on longitudinal mRNA-seq of iPSC-derived neural stem cell (NSC) differentiation into neurons (n = 3 iPSC donor lines) ( Schafer et al., 2019 ).

(G) Gene interaction map and expression fold changes (bar graphs) of neuronal differentiation trajectory genes. Left and top: up in AD iNs and down in differentiation. Right and bottom: down in AD iNs and up in differentiation. Colored nodes in interaction map indicate cell cycle, synapse, and ion channel genes.

See also Figure S3 and Table S5 .

GSEA of the most significantly (padj < 0.01) upregulated AD iN DE genes indicated that these genes were enriched for a broad semantic spectrum around cell cycle control, stem/progenitor cell maintenance, signal transduction pathways, apoptosis, and cancer-related pathways ( Figure 4 A; Table S5 ). The top significantly ranked Gene Ontology (GO) terms also identified an overrepresentation of genes involved in cellular stress response, stem cell-related signal transduction, aging, and cell death competence; the top significantly ranked Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathways were related to pathways involved in cancer and senescence ( Figures 4 B and 4C). These GO and KEGG categories were also enriched within upregulated genes in post-mortem AD data. We tested previously defined gene sets that were representative for neuronal precursor and immature neuronal signaling pathways, cell cycle re-entry, and cancer-related malignant transformation, determining that YAP/TAZ, Notch, HIF1α, NF-κB, and Myc signaling, the tumor suppressor p53 and TGFβ pathways, stem/progenitor-associated gene sets such as cell cycle control (both positive and negative) and apoptosis, and corresponding marker genes were enriched in AD iNs ( Figures 4 D and 4E; Bild et al., 2006 ; Cordenonsi et al., 2011 ; Vilimas et al., 2007 ). Notably, such pathways are typically silenced as neurons differentiate ( Arendt, 2012 ; Arendt et al., 2000 ; Busser et al., 1998 ; Currais et al., 2009 ; Herrup and Yang, 2007 ; Kole et al., 2013 ; Smith et al., 2000 ; Yang et al., 2001 ).

To more directly assess the identity of control and AD iNs along the neuronal differentiation path, we first extracted a neuronal differentiation trajectory on the basis of longitudinal RNA-seq profiles from three human iPSC-derived neural stem cell (NSC) lines to neurons ( Figure S3 ; Table S5 ; Schafer et al., 2019 ). Control iNs showed a clear increase in similarity with progressive differentiation, whereas AD iNs showed little increase of similarity with progressive differentiation and higher similarity to immature stages ( Figure 4 F). To exclude the possibility that AD iNs were merely incompletely converted from fibroblasts into neurons, we performed the same test but for a direct iN conversion trajectory based on longitudinal RNA-seq profiles from three human fibroblast lines to neurons ( Figure S3 ; Herdy et al., 2019 ). Both control and AD iNs showed an equally increasing similarity, paralleling progressive iN conversion, and they exhibited equivalent conversion efficiencies, loss of fibroblast signatures, and iN identity marked by NeuN ( Figures 1 D and 1E; Figures S1 and S3 ). Furthermore, principal-component analysis (PCA)-based differentiation trajectory variance calculation defined a differentiation path on which AD iNs mapped more toward immature stages ( Figure S3 ). AD iNs thus successfully completed iN conversion but showed a lack of mature neuronal identity gene expression. The genes that are both the most upregulated during differentiation and also decreased in AD iNs relate to synaptic functions, whereas the genes that are downregulated during differentiation and increased in AD iNs hint toward changes in cell cycle control ( Figure 4 G). These data suggest that AD iNs regress toward an aberrantly de-differentiated state. This hypo-mature state partially resembles both malignant transformation-like signatures and immature neuronal stages. This observation might relate to the fundamental cell biological process of de-differentiation in response to injury; notably, directly converted iNs never proceeded through a differentiation path from neural precursors into neurons.

Cellular fate plasticity in response to injury is a key mechanism for tissue homeostasis ( Merrell and Stanger, 2016 ). Because cell damage and stress can trigger de-differentiation of neurons, we measured levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in iN cultures ( Kruman et al., 2004 ; Poplawski et al., 2020 ; Renthal et al., 2020 ). Indeed, AD iNs displayed increased levels of total ROS ( Figure 5 A), and we also detected changes in DNA damage repair-related gene expression and increased numbers of nuclear H2A.X-positive foci in AD iN nuclei ( Figure S2 ). ROS and DNA damage can trigger neuronal aneuploidy and expression of cell cycle re-entry markers in AD brains ( Mosch et al., 2007 ), and the cell cycle markers CCNB1 (cyclin B1) and CDK2 become silenced during neuronal differentiation ( Figure 5 B). Indeed, immunocytochemistry revealed increased levels of cyclin B1 immunoreactivity in AD iNs compared with controls ( Figures 5 C and 5D). Within the AD iN group, we observed slightly more neurons with both lower and higher DNA content, with the increase of AD iNs over the diploid level being significant ( Figure S2 ), but we could not detect a completed neuronal DNA replication in iNs ( Figures 5 E and 5F; Figure S2 ). We assessed lactate dehydrogenase A (LDHA), a canonical glycolysis gene that is inversely associated with mature neuronal identity and is downregulated during neuronal differentiation ( Figure 5 G). Neuronal re-expression of LDHA is potentially disruptive for oxidative metabolism and might challenge their fate stability ( Zheng et al., 2016b ). We found LDHA mRNA and protein levels to be significantly upregulated in AD iNs ( Figure 4 E; Figures 5 H and 5I; Figure S2 ). Thus, AD iNs show signs of elevated ROS, DNA damage, and aneuploid DNA contents, which may trigger neuronal de-differentiation and lead to an aberrant hypo-mature cellular state that partially mirrors a stem/progenitor-associated transcriptional program and expression of non-neuronal proteins, including markers of cell cycle and non-neuronal energy metabolism. Figure 5 AD iNs display markers of hypo-maturity and cell cycle re-entry, but no completed cell cycle (A) Total ROS in FACS-purified control (n = 9) and AD (n = 11) iNs; 4 weeks conversion. Circles, subjects. Bars, mean ± SEM, unpaired t test. (B) Longitudinal mRNA-seq expression levels of CCNB1 and CDK2 during differentiation of NSCs into 14 day neurons. Circles, subjects; linear regression (n = 3 iPSC-NSC lines). (C and D) Immunofluorescence analysis of control (n = 7) and AD (n = 8) iNs for cyclin B1. Quantification of mean fluorescence intensities (MFIs) of cyclin B1 within βIII-tub + neuron areas. Circles, subjects. Bars, mean ± SEM, unpaired t test (C). Representative immunofluorescence images show intensity and distribution of cyclin B1 immunoreactivity in iNs (D). (E and F) Fluorescence image of control (n = 9) and AD (n = 9) iNs stained for DNA replication following 3 weeks of iN conversion and 72 h of EdU exposure. No βIII-tub + neurons with EdU + nuclei (arrow) were detected. Circles, subjects. (G) Expression levels of marker genes LDHA and HK2 during differentiation of iPSC NSCs into 14 day neurons. Circles, subjects; linear regression (n = 3 iPSC lines). (H and I) Immunofluorescence analysis of control (n = 11) and AD (n = 7) iNs for LDHA. Black arrows indicate βIII-tub + neurons without LDHA, and white arrows indicate βIII-tub/LDHA double-positive neurons (H). MFIs of LDHA signal within βIII-tub + neuron areas (left) and quantification of strongly double-positive cells (right). Circles, subjects. Bars, mean ± SEM, unpaired t tests (I). ∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, and ∗∗∗ p < 0.001. See also Figure S2 .

AD iNs display markers of hypo-maturity and cell cycle re-entry, but no completed cell cycle

(A) Total ROS in FACS-purified control (n = 9) and AD (n = 11) iNs; 4 weeks conversion. Circles, subjects. Bars, mean ± SEM, unpaired t test.

(B) Longitudinal mRNA-seq expression levels of CCNB1 and CDK2 during differentiation of NSCs into 14 day neurons. Circles, subjects; linear regression (n = 3 iPSC-NSC lines).

(C and D) Immunofluorescence analysis of control (n = 7) and AD (n = 8) iNs for cyclin B1. Quantification of mean fluorescence intensities (MFIs) of cyclin B1 within βIII-tub + neuron areas. Circles, subjects. Bars, mean ± SEM, unpaired t test (C). Representative immunofluorescence images show intensity and distribution of cyclin B1 immunoreactivity in iNs (D).

(E and F) Fluorescence image of control (n = 9) and AD (n = 9) iNs stained for DNA replication following 3 weeks of iN conversion and 72 h of EdU exposure. No βIII-tub + neurons with EdU + nuclei (arrow) were detected. Circles, subjects.

(G) Expression levels of marker genes LDHA and HK2 during differentiation of iPSC NSCs into 14 day neurons. Circles, subjects; linear regression (n = 3 iPSC lines).

(H and I) Immunofluorescence analysis of control (n = 11) and AD (n = 7) iNs for LDHA. Black arrows indicate βIII-tub + neurons without LDHA, and white arrows indicate βIII-tub/LDHA double-positive neurons (H). MFIs of LDHA signal within βIII-tub + neuron areas (left) and quantification of strongly double-positive cells (right). Circles, subjects. Bars, mean ± SEM, unpaired t tests (I).

∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, and ∗∗∗ p < 0.001. See also Figure S2 .

We examined the chromatin landscape using assay for transposase-accessible chromatin using sequencing (ATAC-seq) of control and AD iNs (n = 21 donors) to determine if epigenetic regulation underlies the impaired state. Stem and progenitor cells, as well as transformed cells, typically reflect a globally open chromatin state, whereas differentiated cells possess a more defined and closed chromatin landscape ( Figure 6 A). ATAC-seq revealed a widespread increase in the number and width of open chromatin regions in AD iNs, which on average displayed 36% more peaks that were 7% wider ( Figures 6 B and 6C). Peak scoring showed a marked increase in chromatin accessibility in AD iNs around identified peaks ( Figure 6 D; Figure S4 ). Peaks in proximity to promoters that are exclusively accessible in AD iNs were enriched for signaling and nervous system development genes ( Figure S5 ). Furthermore, direct comparison of the epigenetic landscapes of AD and control iNs to longitudinal timeline ATAC-seq data of neuronal differentiation from iPSCs ( Zhang et al., 2018 ) confirmed that AD iN peak profiles better resembled less mature stages during neural iPSC differentiation ( Figure S4 ). Differential peak analysis revealed 7,188 highly significantly differentially accessible peaks, 97% of which were gained in AD ( Figure 6 E). Annotation of differential peaks suggested increased accessibility to be a global phenomenon across all genomic region types, and changes in peak accessibility at promoter-transcriptional start site (TSS) regions significantly correlated with RNA-seq expression changes ( Figure 6 F; Figure S4 ). GSEA revealed that the genes with both the most significantly increased ATAC-seq promoter-TSS accessibility and increased RNA-seq expression in AD iNs were enriched KEGG pathways associated with cancer, metabolic pathways, and apoptosis ( Figure 6 G). Figure 6 Execution of a malignant epigenetic program underlies hypo-mature neuronal state of AD iNs (A) Schematic for globally open chromatin landscape in stem/progenitor cells and closed chromatin landscape in mature cells. (B and C) Number (B) and width (C) of open chromatin ATAC-seq peaks in control (n = 11) and AD (n = 10) iNs. Circles, donors. Bars, mean ± SD unpaired t test, ∗ p < 0.05. (D) Chromatin accessibility region scores centered around peak regions. (E) Volcano plot depicting control (n = 11) versus AD (n = 10) iN differentially accessible ATAC-seq peaks. Plot shows all 7,188 peaks with p < 0.0001 and a fold change | >1|. (F) Density plot for differential accessibility ATAC-seq peak fold changes separated by genomic annotation (left). Pie chart shows peak fractions per annotation (middle). Bar graph shows linear regression slopes between ATAC-seq peak accessibility and RNA-seq expression in promoter-TSS, intronic, and intergenic differential peaks (right). Asterisk, regression p < 0.05. (G) GSEA for genes with significantly increased promoter-TSS peak accessibility and elevated gene expression in AD iNs. Bar graph shows top significantly enriched KEGG pathways. (H) Motif enrichment analysis of AD differentially open peaks. DNA-binding transcription factor names, corresponding stacked motif sequences, bar graph for percentages of target and background sequences with motif, and q values for motif enrichment (q values based on differential peak analysis or with control as background when marked with asterisk). (I) Gene set enrichment analysis of the DNA-binding factors that correspond to all significantly enriched motifs. Bar graph shows top significantly enriched KEGG pathways. (J) RNA-seq and ATAC-seq Genome Browser tracks of representative non-neuronal genes (upregulated expression and increased promoter accessibility in AD iNs) considered incompatible with neuronal identity. See also Figure S4 and Table S6 .

Execution of a malignant epigenetic program underlies hypo-mature neuronal state of AD iNs

(A) Schematic for globally open chromatin landscape in stem/progenitor cells and closed chromatin landscape in mature cells.

(B and C) Number (B) and width (C) of open chromatin ATAC-seq peaks in control (n = 11) and AD (n = 10) iNs. Circles, donors. Bars, mean ± SD unpaired t test, ∗ p < 0.05.

(D) Chromatin accessibility region scores centered around peak regions.

(E) Volcano plot depicting control (n = 11) versus AD (n = 10) iN differentially accessible ATAC-seq peaks. Plot shows all 7,188 peaks with p < 0.0001 and a fold change | >1|.

(F) Density plot for differential accessibility ATAC-seq peak fold changes separated by genomic annotation (left). Pie chart shows peak fractions per annotation (middle). Bar graph shows linear regression slopes between ATAC-seq peak accessibility and RNA-seq expression in promoter-TSS, intronic, and intergenic differential peaks (right). Asterisk, regression p < 0.05.

(G) GSEA for genes with significantly increased promoter-TSS peak accessibility and elevated gene expression in AD iNs. Bar graph shows top significantly enriched KEGG pathways.

(H) Motif enrichment analysis of AD differentially open peaks. DNA-binding transcription factor names, corresponding stacked motif sequences, bar graph for percentages of target and background sequences with motif, and q values for motif enrichment (q values based on differential peak analysis or with control as background when marked with asterisk).

(I) Gene set enrichment analysis of the DNA-binding factors that correspond to all significantly enriched motifs. Bar graph shows top significantly enriched KEGG pathways.

(J) RNA-seq and ATAC-seq Genome Browser tracks of representative non-neuronal genes (upregulated expression and increased promoter accessibility in AD iNs) considered incompatible with neuronal identity.

See also Figure S4 and Table S6 .

To gain insights into which factors and pathways were the most affected by the chromatin changes, we performed motif analysis of gained peaks ( Figure 6 H). Interestingly, several key developmental and cancer-related transcription factors, such as Stat1/3, Klf4/9, Hif1α, FoxO1/3, Sox2, p53, nMyc, TEAD2, and Runx1, which are well known to directly induce the over-transcribed gene sets ( Figure 4 B), were consistently enriched ( Figure 6 F; Figure 4 D). DNA motif-binding factors with elevated activity in significantly differentially gained regions ( Figure 6 E) were enriched for signaling networks that control transcriptional misregulation in cancer, stem cells, malignant transformation signaling pathways, and senescence ( Figures 6 I and 6J; Figure S4 ; Table S6 ). Furthermore, the chromatin landscape signatures at key genes such as LDHA showed that AD iNs gained accessibility at normally silenced promoter regions, where gained accessibility leads to leaky expression and thus promotion of an immature neuronal state, stem cell- and cancer-associated signaling pathways, and precursor-like metabolic properties ( Figure 6 G). Overall, the AD iN-specific chromatin landscape changes accommodate a persistent lack of a differentiated identity and suggest that epigenetic changes might underlie the transcriptional and functional lack of the differentiated state in AD neurons.

Erosion of epigenetic control and transcriptional drift and the incidence of malignant transformation are strongly associated with human aging ( Veitia et al., 2017 ; Zheng et al., 2016a ). To test the involvement of aging in our model system, we generated iPSCs and iPSC-derived iNs (iPSC-iNs) as a rejuvenated isogenic controls for a subset (n = 20) of our cohort ( Figure 7 A; Figures S1 and S5 ). As shown previously, conversion of iPSCs to iPSC-iNs is highly efficient, as virtually all EGFP-positive iPSCs convert into neurons that also predominantly express NeuN and vGlut1 ( Figures S5 ; Schafer et al., 2019 ). Data reduction using tSNE and PCA on the global gene expression of all four cell types together resulted in clear separation by cell type ( Figure 7 C; Figure S1 ). Because iNs and iPSC-iNs clustered separately, we asked to what extent both neuronal models were comparable. DE analysis between all fibroblast and iN samples, and between all iPSC and iPSC-iN samples, revealed many overlapping neuronal GO terms equally enriched in iNs and iPSC-iNs ( Figure S5 ; Table S7 ). Similar to iNs, iPSC-iN cultures contained vGlut1 + and GABA + neurons and expressed marker genes for both subtypes, and both showed the highest similarity to cortical excitatory neurons from single-cell RNA-seq (scRNA-seq) data ( Figure 7 D; Figure S5 ; Mathys et al., 2019 ). Consistently, compared with gene expression signatures from bulk adult brain regions from the Allen BrainSpan dataset, both iNs and iPSC-iNs were most similar to prefrontal and frontal adult human cortex samples and less to other regions ( Figure 7 E; Mertens et al., 2015a ; Schafer et al., 2019 ). To evaluate AD-specific signatures in iPSCs and iPSC-iNs, we performed DE analysis. No significant DE genes were detected between iPSC-iNs of control and AD subjects ( Figure 7 F). iPSC-iNs showed more gene expression differences than iPSCs or fibroblasts, which did not reach statistical significance ( Figure 7 F). Interestingly, however, the gene sets that best characterized the dysregulation in AD iNs showed a consistent but unsignificant trend also in iPSC-iNs ( Figure S5 ). Figure 7 AD signature depends on old adult ontogenic identity of iNs that is depleted via iPSC rejuvenation (A) Schematic for generation of iPSC-derived induced neurons (iPSC-iNs) from fibroblast cohort. (B) Phase contrast and immunostaining of iPSC for Nanog and of iPSC-iNs for EGFP, Map2, βIII-tubulin, and NeuN. Scale bars, 100 μm. (C) tSNE plot of transcriptomes from fibroblasts (n = 32), iNs (n = 28; 3 weeks), iPSCs (n = 21), and iPSC-iNs (n = 20; 3 weeks), clustering into four distinct groups. (D) Heatmap showing transcriptome-wide correlation between iNs and iPSC-iNs and adult human cortex-derived excitatory neurons (Ex), inhibitory neurons (In), astrocytes (Ast), oligodendrocytes (Oli), and OPCs (snRNA-seq data; Mathys et al., 2019 ). (E) Correlation of fibroblasts, iPSCs, iNs, and iPSC-iNs to the merged transcriptomes of seven adult human brain regions from the Allen BrainSpan dataset. (F) Volcano plots depicting control versus AD DE genes in iPSCs (n = 9 versus 12), and iPSC-iNs (n = 8 versus 12). (G) DNAm ages of iNs and fibroblasts compared with the chronological ages of their donors and of hPSCs, NSCs, and neurons compared with time in vitro ( Kim et al., 2014 ) as reference. (H and I) DNAm ages of control and AD iNs compared with the DNAm ages of their parental fibroblasts (H) and DNAm age acceleration between iN and fibroblasts (I). (J) Expression changes of iN upregulated and downregulated iN aging genes ( Mertens et al., 2015a ) in AD iNs. (K and L) Ontogenic neural identity: iN and iPSC-iN transcriptomes were correlated to the 163 fetal (8–37 post-conceptual week [pcw]) and 52 adult (23–40 years) cortical BrainSpan samples (K). Transcriptome similarity of iNs and iPSC-iNs plotted to human cortical samples ranging from fetal to adult (L). (M) RRHO mapping of the transcriptional overlap between pre-natal versus adult human brain and between iPSC-iNs versus iN differences. See also Figures S5–S7 and Table S7 .

AD signature depends on old adult ontogenic identity of iNs that is depleted via iPSC rejuvenation

(A) Schematic for generation of iPSC-derived induced neurons (iPSC-iNs) from fibroblast cohort.

(B) Phase contrast and immunostaining of iPSC for Nanog and of iPSC-iNs for EGFP, Map2, βIII-tubulin, and NeuN. Scale bars, 100 μm.

(C) tSNE plot of transcriptomes from fibroblasts (n = 32), iNs (n = 28; 3 weeks), iPSCs (n = 21), and iPSC-iNs (n = 20; 3 weeks), clustering into four distinct groups.

(D) Heatmap showing transcriptome-wide correlation between iNs and iPSC-iNs and adult human cortex-derived excitatory neurons (Ex), inhibitory neurons (In), astrocytes (Ast), oligodendrocytes (Oli), and OPCs (snRNA-seq data; Mathys et al., 2019 ).

(E) Correlation of fibroblasts, iPSCs, iNs, and iPSC-iNs to the merged transcriptomes of seven adult human brain regions from the Allen BrainSpan dataset.

(F) Volcano plots depicting control versus AD DE genes in iPSCs (n = 9 versus 12), and iPSC-iNs (n = 8 versus 12).

(G) DNAm ages of iNs and fibroblasts compared with the chronological ages of their donors and of hPSCs, NSCs, and neurons compared with time in vitro ( Kim et al., 2014 ) as reference.

(H and I) DNAm ages of control and AD iNs compared with the DNAm ages of their parental fibroblasts (H) and DNAm age acceleration between iN and fibroblasts (I).

(J) Expression changes of iN upregulated and downregulated iN aging genes ( Mertens et al., 2015a ) in AD iNs.

(K and L) Ontogenic neural identity: iN and iPSC-iN transcriptomes were correlated to the 163 fetal (8–37 post-conceptual week [pcw]) and 52 adult (23–40 years) cortical BrainSpan samples (K). Transcriptome similarity of iNs and iPSC-iNs plotted to human cortical samples ranging from fetal to adult (L).

(M) RRHO mapping of the transcriptional overlap between pre-natal versus adult human brain and between iPSC-iNs versus iN differences.

See also Figures S5–S7 and Table S7 .

We next tested if the detected AD iN signatures merely reflect a more pronounced transcriptional and epigenetic aging signature or if AD signatures are distinct from normal aging but dependent on age. Genome-wide DNA methylation (DNAm) profiles of control and AD iNs and their parental fibroblasts allow the calculation of epigenetic DNAm ages ( Horvath et al., 2018 ). Clearly, iN DNAm ages reflect the adult and old chronological ages of their donors, whereas pluripotent stem cells and their derivatives reflect pre-natal DNAm ages ( Figure 7 H; Huh et al., 2016 ; Kim et al., 2014 ; Lo Sardo et al., 2017 ). AD iNs did not display signs of accelerated epigenetic aging over control iNs ( Figures 7 I and 7J; Figure S6 ; Horvath, 2013 ; Huh et al., 2016 ). Consistently, aging genes in iNs previously identified by RNA-seq from a healthy aging cohort did not show extended changes in AD iNs, and plotting AD iN DE genes across healthy aging iNs did not indicate their regulation by age; rather, a slightly inverse trend was detected ( Figure 7 J; Figure S6 ; Mertens et al., 2015a ). Because these data are consistent with the frequent observation that iPSC derivatives represent pre-natal brain stages ( Luo et al., 2016 ; Stein et al., 2014 ), we asked if the ontogenic identity of iNs might better reflect adult stages. To classify the iNs and iPSC-iNs on an ontogenic identity scale, we compared our transcriptome data with samples from the entire range of human cortical brain development ( Figure 7 K). As expected, we found that iPSC-iNs showed a relatively high degree of similarity with the transcriptomes of the pre-natal brain samples but exhibited relatively poor correlation with adult brain stages ( Figure 7 L; Figure S6 ). Conversely, iNs displayed the highest similarity to the adult brain samples but not to pre-natal samples, and no similarity differences between control and AD iNs were detected ( Figure 7 L; Figure S6 ). Integration of single-nucleus RNA-seq data showed a similar pattern for excitatory and inhibitory neurons and further indicated that adult transcriptome identity is encoded primarily within excitatory neuronal profiles ( Figure S6 ). Furthermore, along a PCA-based pre-natal versus adult variance dimension, iNs also mapped close to adult brain samples, whereas iPSC-iNs mapped close to pre-natal samples ( Figure S6 ). Again, no major differences between control and AD iNs were noted, and the genes that contributed to the pre-natal versus adult variance were different from neuronal differentiation trajectory genes, indicating that AD-related neuronal fate instability does not challenge the overall adult identity of the cells to an extent that they would adopt fetal-like signatures ( Figure S6 ). In addition, adult brain-specific splicing of the microtubule-associated protein tau (MAPT) ( Andreadis, 2005 ) and of the voltage-gated sodium channel gene SCN2A ( Sanders et al., 2018 ) was seen exclusively in iNs and adult brain, whereas iPSC-iNs predominantly expressed the fetal isoforms ( Figure S7 ). Consistently, rank-rank hypergeometric transcriptional overlap (RRHO) mapping between pre-natal and adult brain, and between iPSC-iNs and iNs, revealed a pronounced bias in the overlap of iNs with adult brain samples ( Figure 7 M; Plaisier et al., 2010 ). Thus, whole-transcriptome and epigenetic aging profiles of iNs more closely reflect adult human brain stages, indicating that iNs are a useful model system to model age-dependent pathological mechanisms of sporadic AD. These data further support the view that features of AD relate to, but are distinct from, the features of normal aging, and their emergence in human cell culture models depends on age and adult-specific neuronal features.

## Discussion
Neuronal de-differentiation, loss of mature neuronal fate, and markers that suggest a re-entry of neurons into the cell cycle are pathological hallmarks of AD ( Arendt, 2012 ; Arendt et al., 2000 ; Busser et al., 1998 ; Currais et al., 2009 ; Herrup and Yang, 2007 ; McShea et al., 1999 ; Nagy et al., 1997 ; Yang et al., 2001 ). Our data are consistent with the observation that oxidative stress and DNA damage can induce cell cycle re-entry markers of neurons ( Walton et al., 2019 ; Yang et al., 2001 ), leading to neuronal hypo-maturity and functional defects ( Kruman et al., 2004 ; Sharma et al., 2017 ), that might further lead to metabolic reprogramming, activation of cell death competence ( Benn and Woolf, 2004 ; Kole et al., 2013 ; Marinaro et al., 2020 ), and inflammatory senescence-like phenotypes ( Chow et al., 2019 ; Contrepois et al., 2017 ; Riessland et al., 2019 ). The transformation-associated de-differentiation pathways that emerged from our data represent new targets for further investigation in neurons ( Bild et al., 2006 ; Cordenonsi et al., 2011 ; Koch et al., 2012 ; Lu et al., 2014 ; Meyer et al., 2019 ; Moehlmann et al., 2002 ; Saygin et al., 2019 ; Wolfe, 2007 ), as they might result in a “return to immaturity” that might cause several hallmark features of AD pathology ( de Strooper and Karran, 2016 ), including synaptic ( Koffie et al., 2011 ) and neurite degeneration ( Coleman, 2005 ). Outside of the nervous system, epigenetic erosion and loss of cell identity are established key features of aging ( Ma et al., 2018 ; Teschendorff et al., 2013 ; Veitia et al., 2017 ; Wang et al., 2008 ; Zheng et al., 2016a ). However, only old iNs from AD patients showed signatures of fate instability comparable with those of malignant transformation. Previous studies on Huntington’s disease have consistently detected signs of neuronal epigenetic instability ( Ayata et al., 2018 ; von Schimmelmann et al., 2016 ). Injury is a well-established trigger of cellular de-differentiation, and the changes we observed are likely a consequence of human neurons adhering to this principle ( Gu et al., 2020 ; Jopling et al., 2010 ; Poplawski et al., 2020 ; Renthal et al., 2020 ; Tzahor and Poss, 2017 ; Wagner et al., 2017 ). Cellular aging features ( Huh et al., 2016 ; Mertens et al., 2015a , 2018 ; Tang et al., 2017 ; Victor et al., 2014 ) and adult-like neuronal identity of iNs ( Luo et al., 2019 ) are likely critical for the emergence of such phenotypes in sporadic AD neurons, because erasure of aging signatures and re-gaining of fetal identity represents a potent rescue in this study ( Miller et al., 2013 ; Ocampo et al., 2016 ). However, neurons that carry aggressive familial AD mutations still show a similar phenotype when generated from iPSCs ( Caldwell et al., 2020 ). Collectively, for studying age-related vulnerability and mechanisms relevant to AD, iNs have advantages over iPSC models and thus complement isogenic iPSC strategies ( van der Kant et al., 2019 ; Meyer et al., 2019 ; Woodruff et al., 2013 ). (Refer to the Supplemental information for an extended discussion.)

Fibroblasts carry skin-specific, age-related changes that might interfere with AD-related changes in iNs, and some brain-specific changes might not be captured in iNs. Also, overexpression of Ngn2 and Ascl1 might override endogenous differences. We selected the Ngn2-based iPSC-iN method to be directly comparable with the fibroblast-based iN method, and our data do not exclude that other iPSC differentiation models might recapitulate AD disease phenotypes more prominently. Finally, despite the comparatively large size of our clinically well-characterized and stratified cohort of patients and controls, this cohort might not be fully representative of the entirety of AD patients.

## STAR★Methods
REAGENT or RESOURCE SOURCE IDENTIFIER Antibodies Goat anti Vimentin Chemicon Cat#AB1620 Mouse anti Beta-III-tubulin BioLegend Cat#MMS-435P Rabbit anti Beta-III-tubulin BioLegend Cat#802001 Mouse anti NeuN EMD Millipore Cat#MAB377 Rabbit anti NeuN Cell Signaling Cat#24307T Rabbit anti vGlut1 (BNPI) Synaptic Systems Cat#135302 Rabbit anti Gamma-Aminobutyric acid (GABA) Sigma Aldrich Cat#A2052 PE-conjugated anti PSA-NCAM Miltenyi Biotec Cat#130-117-394 Rabbit anti Synapsin Merck Cat#574778 Mouse anti PSD-95 (28/42) Antibodies Inc Cat#75028 Rabbit anti Phospho-Histone H2A.X P-Ser139 (20E3) Cell Signaling Cat#9718T Mouse anti Cyclin B1 (GNS1) Santa Cruz Biotech Cat#sc-245 Chicken anti Map2 Abcam Cat#ab5392 Rabbit anti LDHA (C4B5) Cell Signaling Cat#3582 Goat anti Nanog R&D Systems Cat#AF1997-SP Mouse anti Tau (TG5) Peter Davies N/A Mouse anti Phospho-Tau (PHF1) Peter Davies N/A Mouse anti Phospho-Tau (AT8) Thermo Fisher Scientific Cat#MN1020 Mouse anti Phospho-Tau (AT100) Thermo Fisher Scientific Cat#MN1060 Mouse anti conformation epitoe of Tau (Alz-50) Peter Davies N/A Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated Donkey Anti Rabbit IgG Thermo Fisher Scientific Cat#A-21206 Alexa Fluor 647-conjugated Donkey Anti Rabbit IgG Thermo Fisher Scientific Cat#A-31573 Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated Donkey Anti Mouse IgG Thermo Fisher Scientific Cat#A-21202 Alexa Fluor 647-conjugated Donkey Anti Mouse IgG Thermo Fisher Scientific Cat#A-31571 Cy3-conjugated Donkey Anti-Mouse IgG Jackson ImmunoRes. Cat#711-165-151 Cy3-conjugated Donkey Anti-Rabbit IgG Jackson ImmunoRes. Cat#711-165-152 Anti-Mouse HRP Detection Module Bio-Techne Cat#DM-002 Bacterial and virus strains NEB Stable Competent E. coli New England Biolabs Cat#C3040H Cyto-Tune Sendai reprogramming kit Invitrogen Cat#A16517 Biological samples Fibroblast cultures from cohort (see Table S1 ) this study and Mertens et al., 2015a Table S1 Chemicals, peptides, and recombinant proteins Trizol-LS reagent Thermo Fisher Scientific Cat#10296010 Puromycin Sigma Aldrich Cat#P8833 Collagenase IV dissociation reagent Thermo Fisher Scientific Cat#17104019 TrypLE dissociation reagent Thermo Fisher Scientific Cat#12604013 B-27 supplement Thermo Fisher Scientific Cat#17504044 N2 supplement Thermo Fisher Scientific Cat#17502048 Matrigel coating reagent Thermo Fisher Scientific Cat#3432-005-01 Non-Essential Amino Acids (NEAA) supplement Thermo Fisher Scientific Cat#M7145 Laminin coating reagent Sigma Aldrich Cat#L2020 Geltrex coating reagent Thermo Fisher Scientific Cat#A1413201 iPS-Brew culture medium Miltenyi Biotec Cat#130-104-368 PluriPro culture medium Cell Guidance Systems Cat#M04 Y-27632 (ROCK inhibitor) StemCell Technologies Cat#72308 Dibutyryl-cyclic-AMP Sigma Aldrich Cat#sc-201567B Recombinant Noggin Preprotech Cat#6057NG CHIR99021 LC Laboratories Cat#C-6556 LDN-193189 Cayman Chemicals Cat#19396 A83-1 Santa Cruz Biotech Cat#K1119 Forskolin LC Laboratories Cat#F-9929 SB-431542 Cayman Chemicals Cat#431543 Poly-L-ornithine coating reagent Sigma Aldrich Cat#A-004-C Recombinant human GDNF R&D Biosystems Cat#212-GD Recombinant human BDNF R&D Biosystems Cat#248-BDB Doxycycline Sigma Aldrich Cat#089M4004V KnockOut Serum Replacement (KOSR) Thermo Fisher Scientific Cat#10828010 BrainPhys culture media StemCell Technologies Cat#05790 Triton X-100 reagent Sigma Aldrich Cat#X100 DAPI fluorescence reagent for DNA Sigma Aldrich Cat#D8417 TURBO DNase for NGS library preparation Ambion Cat#AM2238 DNase for cell culture Roche Cat#4716728001 Fluo4-AM for live-cell calcium imaging Thermo Fisher Scientific Cat#F14201 Vybrant DyeCycle for DNA content Thermo Fisher Scientific Cat#V35003 SYBR Green I for qPCR Life Technologies Cat#S7563 NEBNext High-Fidelity PCR Mastermix New England Biolabs Cat#M0541 TruSeq Stranded mRNA Sample Prep kit Illumina Cat#20020594 SuperScript III First-Strand Synthesis System Thermo Fisher Scientific Cat#18080051 Tagment DNA Enzyme and Buffer kit Illumina Cat# 20034197 ChIP DNA Concentrator Zymo Research Cat#D5205 cOmplete EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail Roche Cat#11836170001 PhosSTOP Phosphatase Inhibitors Zymo Research Cat#PHOSS-RO RIPA Lysis and Extraction Buffer Thermo Fisher Scientific Cat#89900 Critical commercial assays Amyoid beta ELISA kit Meso Scale Diagnostics Cat#K15200G Click-iT EdU Alexa Fluor 488 Imaging Kit Thermo Fisher Scientific Cat#C10337 Total ROS detection kit Enzo Life Sciences Cat#ENZ-51011 ProteinSimple 12-230 kDa Separation Module Bio-Techne Cat#SM-W004 ProteinSimple Jess 25-Capillary Cartridges Bio-Techne Cat#PS-CC01 Deposited data RNA-Seq and ATAC-Seq raw data generated here deposited to ArrayExpress E-MTAB-10352 DNAm EPIC array raw data generated here deposited to ArrayExpress E-MTAB-10344 Experimental models: cell lines iPSC line “Chap” ( Schafer et al., 2019 ) N/A iPSC line “Clay” ( Schafer et al., 2019 ) N/A iPSC line “Cent” ( Schafer et al., 2019 ) N/A Oligonucleotides TruSeq RNA-Seq Single Indexes Set A Illumina Cat#20020492 TruSeq RNA-Seq Single Indexes Set A Illumina Cat#20020493 Nextera primers for ATAC-Seq libraries ( Buenrostro et al., 2013 ) N/A Recombinant DNA pLVXUbC-rtTA-Ngn2:2A:Ascl1 ( Herdy et al., 2019 ) Addgene #127289 pLVXUbC-rtTA-Ngn2:2A:EGFP ( Schafer et al., 2019 ) Addgene #84777 pLVXTP-GcAMP6m This study N/A pCSC-hSyn1::dsRed ( Mertens et al., 2015b ) N/A pLVX-EF1a-tetOn-IRES-G418 (EtO) ( Mertens et al., 2015a ) Addgene #84776 Software and algorithms STAR Aligner https://github.com/alexdobin/STAR N/A Babraham Bioinformatics TrimGalore https://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk N/A Samtools samtools.github.io N/A Hypergeometric Optimization of Motif EnRichment (HOMER) homer.ucsd.edu N/A DESeq2 https://github.com/mikelove/DESeq2 N/A deepTools https://deeptools.readthedocs.io N/A bedtools https://bedtools.readthedocs.io N/A MBF Bioscience Neurolucida https://www.mbfbioscience.com/neurolucida N/A Integrative Genomics Viewer - Broad Institute (IGV) software.broadinstitute.org/software/igv N/A GraphPad Prism graphpad.com N/A FlowJo flowjo.com N/A STRING-db string-db.org N/A DAVID Functional Annotation https://david.ncifcrf.gov N/A Reduce + Visualize Gene Ontology (REVIGO) revigo.irb.hr N/A FACSChorus Software Becton Dickinson N/A ChAMP 10.18129/B9.bioc.ChAMP N/A RnBeads rnbeads.org N/A DNAmAGE http://dnamage.genetics.ucla.edu N/A Rank Rank Hypergeometric Overlap (RRHO) 10.18129/B9.bioc.RRHO N/A ZEN Imaging Software Carl Zeiss N/A ImageJ https://imagej.nih.gov/ij N/A

Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Fred H. Gage ( gage@salk.edu ).

All unique and stable reagents generated in this study of which sufficient quantities exists are available from the Lead Contact with a completed Materials Transfer Agreement. Direct conversion lentiviral plasmids have been deposited to Addgene #127288 (pLVX-UbC-rtTA-Ngn2:2A:Ascl1) and #127289 (pLVX-UbC-rtTA-Ngn2:2A:EGFP).

The accession number for the RNA-Seq and ATAC-Seq raw data generated in this paper is ArrayExpress: E-MTAB-10352. The accession number for the DNAm EPIC array raw data generated in this paper is ArrayExpress: E-MTAB-10344.

Subjects were participants at the Shiley-Marcos Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center (ADRC) at UCSD and provided written informed consent; all procedures were approved by local human subjects committees. Both AD and control subjects underwent rigorous clinical assessment as part of the ADRC study, including detailed neuropsychological testing and brain imaging (MRI), and the subjects selected for biopsies were stratified to show either a clear non-demented clinical picture or clear phenotype of AD (classified as probable AD until pathological confirmation). They were followed for at least 2 years after biopsy with no evidence of cognitive decline (controls) and with evidence of progressive impairment (AD). Punch skin biopsies were obtained at the Altman Clinical & Translational Research Institute (ACTRI) at UCSD, and fibroblast derivation was performed by standard procedures in serum-containing media. Additional familial AD fibroblast lines were described previously ( Israel et al., 2012 ), and 4 old control and 3 young control fibroblast lines were obtained from Coriell (Baltimore longitudinal study of aging) and also described previously ( Kim et al., 2018 ; Mertens et al., 2015a ). Table S1 contains subject information, and Table S2 indicates which subjects were used for each experiment.

Human dermal fibroblasts were cultured in DMEM containing 15% tetracycline-free fetal bovine serum and 0.1% NEAA (Thermo Fisher), transduced with lentiviral particles for pLVXUbC-rtTA-Ngn2:2A:Ascl1 (UNA; Figure S1 ), and expanded in the presence of puromycin (1 μg/ml; Sigma Aldrich) as ‘iN-ready’ fibroblast cell lines. Following at least 3 passages after viral transduction, ‘iN-ready’ fibroblasts were trypsinized and pooled into high densities (30.000 – 50.000 cells per cm 2 ; appx. a 2:1 – 3:1 split from a confluent culture) and, after 24 h, the medium was changed to neuron conversion (NC) medium based on DMEM:F12/Neurobasal (1:1) for 3 weeks. NC medium contains the following supplements: N2 supplement, B27 supplement (both 1x; Thermo Fisher), doxycycline (2 μg/ml, Sigma Aldrich), Laminin (1 μg/ml, Thermo Fisher Scientific), dibutyryl-cyclic-AMP (500 μg/ml, Sigma Aldrich), human recombinant Noggin (150 ng/ml; Preprotech), LDN-193189 (5 μM; Fisher Scientific Co) and A83-1 (5 μM; Santa Cruz Biotechnology Inc.), CHIR99021 (3 μM, LC Laboratories), Forskolin (5 μM, LC Laboratories) and SB-431542 (10 μM; Cayman Chemicals). For further maturation beyond 3 weeks, flow cytometry-isolated or -non-isolated iN cultures were switched to BrainPhys (STEMCELL Technologies)-based neural maturation media containing N2, B27, GDNF, BDNF (both 20 ng/ml, R&D), dibutyryl cyclicAMP (500 μg/ml, Sigma Aldrich), doxycycline (2 μg/ml, Sigma-Aldrich) and laminin (1 μg/ml, Thermo Fisher).

Human iPSCs were reprogrammed using the four Yamanaka factors transferred using the Cyto-Tune Sendai reprogramming kit (Invitrogen) or standard retroviral vectors. Based on clonal characterizations ( Israel et al., 2012 ; Young et al., 2015 ), one iPSC clone for each of the 21 subjects was selected and cultured as colonies on Geltrex (Thermo Fisher)-coated plates in iPS-Brew (Miltenyi Biotec). For iPSC-iN transgene delivery, iPSCs were transferred to a monolayer PluriPro (Cell Guidance Systems) condition, transduced with lentiviral particles for pLVX-UbC-rtTA-Ngn2:2A:EGFP (UNG; Figure S1 ), and expanded in the presence of puromycin (0.5 μg/ml; Sigma Aldrich) as ‘iPSC-iN-ready’ iPSC-UNG lines as previously described ( Schafer et al., 2019 ). To initiate conversion, confluent iPSC-UNG monolayer cultures were transferred into NC media to achieve neuronal conversion of the cultures within 3 weeks before fixing and staining, or isolation by flow cytometry for RNA purification.

For isolation of iNs and iPSC-iNs from 3-week converted cultures, the cells were detached using TrypLE (Thermo Fisher) and stained for PSA-NCAM directly conjugated to PE (Miltenyi Biotec, 1x) for 1 h at 4°C in sorting buffer (250 mM myo-inositol and 5 mg/ml polyvinyl alcohol, PVA, in PBS) containing 1% KOSR (Thermo Fisher). Cells were washed and resuspended in sorting buffer containing EDTA and DNase and filtered using a 40-μm cell strainer. As co-expression analysis for PSA-NCAM and EGFP of iPSC-iNs showed that virtually all EGFP + cells were also PSA-NCAM + , iPSC-iNs were sorted for EGFP-only for all experiments. For RNA isolation, > 50k cells were sorted into Trizol-LS. For extended culture, iNs were sorted into NC media and plated at 150 cells/cm 2 on Geltrex-coated dishes, and media was changed to BrainPhys-based maturation media. To quantify the DNA content of live iNs, cultures were stained with cell-permeable DNA intercalant Vybrant DyeCycle (Thermo Fisher) according to the manufacturer’s instructions and 13,000 cell events per sample were measured by FACS. FACS gates were set for the identification of PSA-NCAM + cells with DNA contents above the diploid level. Quantification of merged and individual data was performed in FlowJo.

Cells were cultured on tissue culture-treated ibidi μ-slides for imaging. Cells were fixed with 4% PFA for 20 min at room temperature and washed 3 × 15 minutes with TBS, followed by a 1-hr block with TBS containing 10% serum and 0.1% Triton X-100. Primary antibodies (Anti-NeuN, 1:200, EMD Millipore; ßIII-tubulin, 1:3000, Covance; Synapsin-I, 1:200, Calbiochem; vGlut1, 1:1000, Synaptic Systems; Nanog, 1:200, R&D Systems; MAP2, 1:500, Sigma Aldrich; GABA, 1:300, Sigma Aldrich; vimentin, 1:500, Chemicon; PSD-95, 1:100, Antibodies Inc., Cyclin B1, 1:100, Santa Cruz; LDHA (C4B5), 1:200, Cell Signaling; H2A.X-pSer139 (20E3), 1:500, Cell Signaling) were applied overnight at 4°C. Following DNA staining with DAPI (1/10,000; Sigma-Aldrich) and TBS washing, secondary antibodies (Donkey Anti-Rabbit IgG Alexa Fluor 488 and 647, Donkey Anti-Mouse IgG Alexa Fluor 488 and 647, and Cy3 Donkey Anti-Mouse IgG and Anti-Rabbit IgG; all 1:250) were incubated for 2 hours at room temperature. After washing, slides were mounted in PVA-DAPCO (Sigma Aldrich). EdU staining was performed using the Click-iT EdU Alexa Fluor 488 Imaging Kit. Confocal images were taken on standard fluorescence microscopes or Zeiss LSM710/780 confocal microscopes. Neuronal morphological complexity scores are based on neuronal reconstruction based on ßIII-tubulin staining using Neurolucida software. ImageJ software analyze particles was used for regions of interest (ROI) selection and quantification of immunofluorescent signals within ROIs. All data for one experiment were acquired from cells cultured and processed in parallel on the same microscope with the exact same setting used.

For measuring total cellular levels of ROS, iNs were converted for 3 weeks and purified by FACS and re-plated. After 4 weeks, total cellular levels of ROS were measured using the Total ROS detection kit (ENZO) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Recording of signals was performed using a fluorescence plate reader (Perkin Elmer).

Total bulk RNA was extracted from fibroblasts and iPSCs and from flow cytometry-isolated iNs and iPSC-iNs following 3 weeks of conversion using Trizol LS reagent (Thermo Fischer), followed by TURBO DNase digestion (Agilent). RNA integrity was assessed before library preparation using the TruSeq Stranded mRNA Sample Prep Kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Illumina). Libraries were sequenced paired-end 125 bp using the Illumina HiSeq 2500 platform. Read trimming was performed using TrimGalore, read mapping was performed using STAR, raw counts were generated using HOMER, variance stabilizing transformation normalization (vst) and differential expression analyses were performed in DESeq2. Statistical values were corrected for false discovery rates (FDR) using the Benjamini-Hochberg method implemented in R. tSNE blots were generated using the Rtsne package from fpkm normalized gene counts of expressed genes. For comparison with previous post-mortem bulk and single-cell RNA-Seq datasets, differentially regulated genes were extracted from the original studies and assessed in our DESeq2 AD versus control iN data. Genes that were regulated in the same direction in iNs as in the original datasets were classified as overlapping genes. Cell type-specific AD signatures were extracted from adsn.ddnetbio.com and from original data shared by the authors ( Grubman et al., 2019 ). Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) for GO Biological Processes, GO Cellular Components and KEGG pathways was performed using DAVID and STRING, and redundancy-trimmed GSEA plots were visualized with REVIGO. For transcriptome concordance calculations, average fold changes of the published up- and downregulated gene sets in AD were calculated in R. Whole-transcriptome PCA, tSNE, and correlation analysis between our data, fetal/adult samples from the Allen BrainSpan atlas, and single nucleus RNA-Seq cell types data ( Mathys et al., 2019 ) are based on fpkm and performed in R, and all genes expressed in our data and the Allen BrainSpan data (13,659 genes) or in all 3 datasets (8,820 genes) were used. Similarity scores represent merged normalized correlation values for each of the 4 cell types. Pre-natal-Adult variance represents the variance dimension PC2 that was calculated by PCA based on the 852 genes that were significantly differentially upregulated in adult versus pre-natal Allen BrainSpan samples. The raw Kendall correlation values were normalized to the average correlation of each BrainSpan sample to our complete dataset and normalized to the average correlation of each of our 4 cell types and the single nucleus RNA-Seq cell types. Differentiation and conversion trajectory genes were obtained by selecting those genes from published NSC differentiation and iN conversion data 43,94 that showed the highest degree of linear correlation with time. Pearson correlation between our individual iN transcriptomes and the published datasets was performed in R based on fpkm of trajectory genes. Rank Rank Hypergeometric Overlap (RRHO) was performed using the UCLA online tool.

ATAC-Seq was performed as described earlier 95 . Briefly, 50,000 iNs were lysed in 50 ul lysis buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl ph 7.5, 10 mM NaCl, 3 mM MgCl2, 0.1% IGEPAL, CA-630, in water), pelleted and resuspended in 50 μL transposase reaction mix (1x Tagment DNA buffer, 2.5 μL Tagment DNA enzyme I in water (Illumina)), and incubated at 37°C for 30 min. DNA was purified with Zymo ChIP DNA concentrator columns (Zymo Research). DNA was then amplified with PCR mix (1.25 μM Nextera primer 1, 1.25 μM Nextera primer 2-bar code, 0.6x SYBR Green I (Life Technologies, S7563), 1x NEBNext High-Fidelity 2x PCR MasterMix, (NEBM0541) for 7-10 cycles, run on an agarose gel for size selection of fragments (160-500 bp), and extracted from the gel and paired-end 75 bp sequencing using the Illumina NextSeq 500 platform. Reads were trimmed using TrimGalore and mapped to the UCSC genome build hg38 using STAR. Peaks were then calculated and annotated using the HOMER software package. For agnostic genome-wide characterization of the peaks, sequence depth-normalized bigWig files were used for generating chromatin accessibility profiles using deepTools software. Next, differential accessibility analysis of all identified ATAC-Seq peaks was performed using differential peaks function in HOMER, and fold changes and significance of the resulting differential peaks were plotted as volcano plot using R ggplot2. Genome-wide integration of the ATAC-Seq data with the RNA-Seq data on a gene-by-gene level was performed based on comparing the fold changes of differentially accessible peaks (HOMER differential ATAC peaks) with the fold changes of differentially expressed genes (RNA-Seq expression), using R, and visualization was performed using R ggplot2 and GraphPad Prism software. GSEA of annotated Promoter-TSS peaks was performed using STRING. Motif enrichment analysis was performed in HOMER. Statistical enrichment of motifs was performed in two ways: i) based on significantly increased peaks (differential peaks output from HOMER), and ii) by using all control iNs as background for AD iN peak and subsequent motif calling. The resulting q-vals generated through method ii) are marked with ∗ in the figures. In addition to significance values, the percentages of target sequences and the percentages of background sequences (randomly selected by HOMER, and matched for target GC content) that contain each motif were determined. GSEA of transcription factors that corresponded to the motifs was performed using STRING. Correlation of control and AD iN ATAC-Seq data to published iPSC-based neural differentiation data ( Zhang et al., 2018 ) was performed by calculating Pearson correlation values in R based on bed files using the bedtools software unionbedg function. Genome browser tracks were generated using the Integrative Genomics Viewer IGV browser (Broad Institute).

Control and AD iNs were converted for 3 weeks and purified by FACS and re-plated on 8-well Geltrex-coated ibidi μ-slides on a density of 50K cells per well. After 4 weeks of conversion, 125 ul of 72 h-conditioned media were subjected to ELISA. Secreted Aβ40 and Aβ42 peptides were quantified by a sandwich immunoassay using the Meso Scale Discovery Multi-spot Assay System according to the manufacturer’s protocol, with the exception that incubation of detection antibody solution was performed overnight at 4°C.

Genomic DNA was extracted from flow cytometry-isolated iNs using the DNeasy Blood and Tissue Kit (QIAGEN). DNA methylation assays were performed on the MethylationEPIC BeadChip as per the standard manufacturer’s protocol (Illumina). Raw intensity IDAT files were processed and analyzed using the R packages ChAMP and RnBeads, arrays were normalized using the BMIQ procedure. Epigenetic Clock analysis was performed using the UCLA online tool, and the ‘ in vitro clock,’ also known as the ‘skin and blood clock,’ was used as it best predicts chronological ages of cell culture samples ( Horvath et al., 2019 ).

For quantitative Ca 2+ event analysis, iNs at 21 days of conversion were transduced with lentiviral particles for pLVXTP-GcAMP6m and pCSC-hSyn1::dsRed, and 48 hours prior to lentiviral transduction, mouse neural stem cell-derived astrocytes were generated on Geltrex-coated 4-well ibidi chamber slides ( Mertens et al., 2013b ). Transgenic iNs were then carefully trypsinized and replated onto astrocyte chamber slides in BrainPhys-based neural maturation media containing N2, B27, GDNF, BDNF (both 20 ng/mL, R&D), dibutyryl cyclicAMP (500 μg/mL, Sigma Aldrich), doxycycline (2 μg/mL, Sigma-Aldrich), laminin (1 μg/mL, Thermo Fisher Scientific), and 1% KOSR (Thermo Fisher Scientific). iNs were then matured for 2 weeks in maturation media on astrocytes, with media changes every 48 hours. Following maturation, calcium surges were imaged in unmodified BrainPhys media on a Yokogawa Cell Voyager 1000 Spinning Disk Confocal Microscope, with a 20x objectives at 488-nm excitation and under controlled temperature (37°C) and CO 2 concentration (5%). Time lapse images were captured using a Prime 95B camera (Teledyne Photometrics) at a speed of 1frame/0.4 s (FPS). Control and AD iNs (n = 10) were assessed with 3 fields recorded for each donor. We analyzed 10 cells per field that were hSyn-dsRed + and exhibited neuron morphologies. Calcium responses were calculated as the change in fluorescence intensity (ΔF) over the initial fluorescence intensity (F-F0)/F0, in which F is the fluorescence at a given time point and F0 is calculated as the average of the first 5 inactive fluorescence measurements at the start of linear intensity decay following a brief period of logarithmic intensity decay at the beginning of imaging ( Mertens et al., 2015b ). A non-response area for each recording was measured for background subtraction and imaging bleach was corrected using the ImageJ plugin Fiji (NIH, Bethesda, MD). The threshold for a positive calcium event can be defined as local maxima when fluorescence response within a soma exceeded a value greater than a certain standard deviation above the mean. For quantification, we have used > 3xSD Ca 2+ events frequency differences between control and AD iNs. These were assessed by non-parametric Kruskal-Wallis test, taking both individual cells and individual donors into account. For qualitative Fluo4-based Ca 2+ live cell imaging, FACS-isolated iNs were cultured on a monolayer of primary mouse neural stem cell-derived astrocytes in BrainPhys-based maturation media containing 1% KOSR (Thermo Fisher), washed in plain BrainPhys, incubated with 3 μM Fluo 4-AM (Molecular Probes) in BrainPhys, and then washed and recorded in plain BrainPhys on a Spinning Disk Confocal Microscope.

ProteinSimple Jess (biotechne) was used for low-input digital capillary western blot-like protein analysis. FACS-purified iNs were plated on Geltrex-coated wells and harvested with PBS. Pellets were then resuspended in RIPA Lysis and Extraction Buffer (Thermo Fisher) containing the cOmplete EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail and PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitors (Sigma Aldrich). Samples for tau analysis were pooled from 3 control and AD lines and analyzed using the 12-230 kDa Jess Separation Module. Concentrations of primary antibodies (ACLY 1:50, beta-tubulin 1: 200, PKM2 1:50, P-PKM2 1:100) were adjusted to the technology. Different antibody dilutions (indicated in the figure) were used for TG5, PHF1, Alz50 (kindly provided by Dr. Peter Davis), and AT100. All assays were run using the standard default settings provided by ProteinSimple Inc., with the exception of an increased 60-min incubation time for the primary antibodies. Data analysis was performed using Compass software (biotechne).

Statistical tests for NGS datasets were performed using inbuilt normalization and significance correction tools in R, DAVID, STRING, HOMER, DESeq2 (HOMER wrapper), and deepTools. Adjusted p values (padj) indicate that values were corrected for multiple testing using false discovery rates (FDR). Non-omics quantitative data statistics were calculated using GraphPad Prism software with the method indicated for each figure or methods section; for control versus AD comparisons, unpaired t tests and ANOVAs were used. To evaluate the statistical significance of enrichment of each of the highlighted pre-defined gene sets in our RNA-Seq data over potential donor bias, paired non-parametric t tests of the control versus AD log2 fold changes in iNs ( Figure 4 D) versus those of fibroblasts ( Figure S3 E) and those of iPSC-iNs ( Figure 6 J) were performed for each pathway. Significance evaluations are marked as ∗ p < 0.05; ∗∗ p < 0.01; and ∗∗∗ p < 0.001 in the figures.