# Title
Amyloid-β peptide 37, 38 and 40 individually and cooperatively inhibit amyloid-β 42 aggregation†

# Abstract
The pathology of Alzheimer's disease is connected to the aggregation of β-amyloid (Aβ) peptide, which in vivo exists as a number of length-variants. Truncations and extensions are found at both the N- and C-termini, relative to the most commonly studied 40- and 42-residue alloforms. Here, we investigate the aggregation of two physiologically abundant alloforms, Aβ 37 and Aβ 38 , as pure peptides and in mixtures with Aβ 40 and Aβ 42 . A variety of molar ratios were applied in quaternary mixtures to investigate whether a certain ratio is maximally inhibiting of the more toxic alloform Aβ 42 . Through kinetic analysis, we show that both Aβ 37 and Aβ 38 self-assemble through an autocatalytic secondary nucleation reaction to form fibrillar β-sheet-rich aggregates, albeit on a longer timescale than Aβ 40 or Aβ 42 . Additionally, we show that the shorter alloforms co-aggregate with Aβ 40 , affecting both the kinetics of aggregation and the resulting fibrillar ultrastructure. In contrast, neither Aβ 37 nor Aβ 38 forms co-aggregates with Aβ 42 ; however, both short alloforms reduce the rate of Aβ 42 aggregation in a concentration-dependent manner. Finally, we show that the aggregation of Aβ 42 is more significantly impeded by a combination of Aβ 37 , Aβ 38 , and Aβ 40 than by any of these alloforms independently. These results demonstrate that the aggregation of any given Aβ alloform is significantly perturbed by the presence of other alloforms, particularly in heterogeneous mixtures, such as is found in the extracellular fluid of the brain.

## Introduction
Alzheimer's disease (AD), a progressive neurodegenerative disease, is the most common cause of dementia worldwide, afflicting nearly 50 million people. 1 Although symptomatic treatments for AD exist, there are currently no available means of slowing or reversing the progression of the disease. 2–4 Recently, the anti-amyloid β (Aβ) antibody aducanumab 5–7 was approved for clinical use by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA), 8 and other promising antibody candidates are in the pipeline, but their clinical efficacy remains uncertain. This is due, in part, to the fact that the etiology of AD remains poorly understood. The most common theory of the progression of AD is the amyloid cascade hypothesis, which contends that aggregation of amyloid β peptide (Aβ) is the critical pathological event responsible for triggering the onset of the disease, with self-assembly of tau an important second step. 9,10 In particular, dispersed Aβ oligomers, rather than the deposited plaques, are widely understood to be the primary cytotoxic forms of these aggregates, 3,11 although fibrils may still play a significant role, directly 12 or indirectly through generation of toxic oligomers through secondary nucleation. 13,14 While the cascade model has been challenged in recent years, 15–17 it is nevertheless commonly accepted that the aggregation of Aβ plays a critical part in the initiation and progression of AD. 18–20 Understanding the Aβ aggregation process, its underlying microscopic steps, and their connection with toxicity, is essential for the development of effective treatments and better diagnostic tools. 21

Aβ is produced from the transmembrane amyloid precursor protein (APP). In the so-called amyloidogenic pathway for processing of APP, sequential cleavages of the protein by β- and γ-secretases result in the release of Aβ into the extracellular fluid. 22,23 There is some variability in the cleavage sites by both secretases, leading to the presence of Aβ length-variants, or alloforms, that are generally between 37 and 43 residues long. 24–27 Of these alloforms, the 40-residue length-variant APP 672-711, Aβ 1–40 , is the predominant form found in vivo , making up almost 60% the Aβ peptide present in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). 28,29 The next most abundant alloforms are Aβ 1–38 , Aβ 1–42 , and Aβ 1–37 , which make up approximately 15%, 10% and 8% of Aβ in CSF, respectively (although the concentration of Aβ 1–42 in CSF decreases significantly in AD patients, which is proposed to be the result of peptide sequestration in plaques 30,31 ). N-terminal length variants are observed both with extended 25 and truncated 32 N-termini, in which case extension retards 33 and truncation accelerates 34 aggregation.

Of the C-terminal Aβ length-variants found most commonly in vivo , the 40- and 42-residue alloforms are the most aggregation prone and are also found in the highest abundance in the characteristic AD plaques. 35 As a result, the aggregation of these peptides has been extensively characterized, while the aggregation of shorter, less aggregation-prone alloforms has remained relatively less studied. 36 Using a chemical kinetics approach, the microscopic steps underlying the in vitro aggregation of Aβ have previously been identified from global analyses of large sets of data over ranges of peptide concentration, 37,38 showing that Aβ peptides, ending at residue 40 and 42, respectively, aggregate through a nucleation-and-growth pathway in which the formation of new aggregates occurs predominantly through the autocatalytic secondary nucleation on the surface of existing fibrils. 14 However, the aggregation behavior of Aβ peptides is highly sensitive to solution conditions, including ionic strength 39,40 and pH, 41 and to the presence of foreign surfaces, such as phospholipid membranes 42,43 and nanoparticles. 44,45 Indeed, in the complex milieu of cerebrospinal fluid, it has been found that, while Aβ 42 aggregates through a secondary-nucleation-dominated mechanism, the rate of this fibril-catalyzed nucleation is significantly reduced relative to that of the peptide in pure buffer. 46,47 Additionally, the aggregation of Aβ peptides is perturbed by the co-existence of Aβ peptides of different lengths. For example, it has previously been shown that, while Aβ 42 and Aβ 40 aggregate to form homomolecular fibrils, monomeric Aβ 42 strongly catalyzes the aggregation of Aβ 40 . 48 Furthermore, Aβ 42 has been shown to both co-aggregate with and cross-seed Aβ peptides with N-terminal extensions ranging from 5–40 residues in length. 33 Consequently, it is important to account for the interactions between Aβ alloforms when considering the in vivo behavior of these peptides.

Although Aβ alloforms ending before residue 40 are less commonly found in plaques in AD patients and are not directly implicated in the onset of AD, these shorter alloforms are nevertheless important factors to consider in the disease-related aggregation of longer alloforms. Formation of oligomeric co-assemblies might decrease the rate of aggregation by peptides with a higher intrinsic nucleation rate, and acceleration the aggregation of peptides with a lower intrinsic nucleation rate. Indeed, there are indications that these shorter alloforms play an important role in vivo by modulating pathogenic Aβ 1–42 aggregation. It has been shown these shorter alloforms are not inherently toxic, but are in fact neuroprotective in a dose-dependent manner and capable of reducing Aβ 1–42 deposition. 49,50 It has been proposed that this neuroprotective behavior could be caused by inhibition of Aβ 42 oligomerization by the shorter alloforms 51,52 or by impeded oligomer conversion to fibrillar structure, 53 as has previously been observed for Aβ 40 . 54,55 The interactions and cross-reactivity between Aβ alloforms other than Aβ 1–42 /Aβ 1–40 have, to our knowledge, not been carefully studied.

In this study, we investigate the interactions and cross-reactivity between four Aβ naturally abundant alloforms, Aβ 37 , Aβ 38 , Aβ 40 , and Aβ 42 , with an aim to unravel any cross-catalysis or co-aggregation processes ( Fig. 1 ). Working in vitro and using highly purified peptides to maximize reproducibility, we characterize their interactions primarily through kinetic aggregation assays using the fluorescent dye thioflavin T (ThT), the quantum yield of which reports quantitatively on aggregate mass concentration when properly calibrated. 56 We investigate not only the effect that each alloform has on the aggregation of the others in binary mixtures, but also consider three-peptide and four-peptide mixtures in order to better understand how different ratios of Aβ alloforms affects the overall rate of conversion of monomer to amyloid fibril. In these experiments, we ask whether any particular ratio of the shorter length variants will maximally affect the aggregation of Aβ 42 .

## Results
The aggregation of Aβ(M1-37), Aβ(M1-38), Aβ(M1-40), and Aβ(M1-42) ( Fig. 2 , referred to herein as Aβ 37 , Aβ 38 , Aβ 40 , and Aβ 42 , respectively) in binary, trinary, and quaternary mixtures was investigated using in vitro kinetic assays, analytical high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), and cryo-transmission electron microscopy (cryo-TEM). First, the aggregation of Aβ 37 or Aβ 38 in the absence of other peptides was investigated. Next, the aggregation of two-peptide systems, including either Aβ 37 or Aβ 38 together with either Aβ 40 or Aβ 42 , was investigated. Additionally, two-peptide cross-seeding experiments were also performed. Subsequently, three-peptide systems composed of Aβ 40 , Aβ 42 , and either Aβ 37 or Aβ 38 were studied. Finally, the aggregation behavior of four-peptide system, including all four alloforms, was investigated. All experiments were performed in 20 mM sodium phosphate buffer, 200 μM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), 0.02% NaN 3 , at pH 7.4, as all alloforms aggregate fast enough to give relatively reproducible data under these conditions. The incorporation of an N-terminal Met residue has no observable effect on the ssNMR spectrum of Aβ 42 fibrils and aggregation mechanism, 57 and was chosen because it allows for expression “as is” with easy purification without the complication of tags and proteases. 58

Before studying the aggregation of Aβ 37 and Aβ 38 in heteromolecular mixtures, the aggregation of each peptide independent of the others was first investigated ( Fig. 3 ). Aβ 37 and Aβ 38 displayed greatly reduced aggregation propensity relative to Aβ 40 and Aβ 42 . In identical conditions and at the low end of the concentration range studied here, Aβ 40 aggregates within two hours, while Aβ 42 aggregates within a fraction of an hour. 37,38,41 However, the aggregation propensity among these naturally occurring Aβ alloforms is evidently not directly correlated to peptide length, as Aβ 38 was found here to aggregate much more slowly than Aβ 37 .

The aggregation curve shapes for both Aβ 37 and Aβ 38 both displayed long lag phases, during which little aggregation was observable above the signal-to-noise ratio, followed by distinct growth phases, in which most aggregate growth happened rapidly. This distinctive curve shape, with a sharp transition between lag and growth phases, is characteristic of an aggregation mechanism driven by a self-replicating, fibril-catalyzed process. The concentration dependence of the rate of aggregation of each peptide was clearly shown by the half-time plots ( Fig. 3c ), in which the time at which half of the total peptide had aggregated was plotted versus starting monomer concentration. The scaling exponent, γ , of a power function fitted to the half-time data provides valuable insight into the underlying aggregation mechanism. 59,60 Aggregation mechanisms driven by fragmentation and secondary nucleation, the two self-replicating processes observed in amyloid-related aggregation, display characteristic γ values: for fragmentation-dominated systems, γ = −0.5, while for secondary-nucleation-dominated systems γ ≤ −1.0, with the exact value depending on the reaction order of secondary nucleation and the balance between primary and secondary nucleation, and whether or not secondary nucleation saturates. 38,61 For both Aβ 37 and Aβ 38 , γ = −1.0, indicating that the aggregation of both peptides is driven by secondary nucleation. This is not surprising, as the aggregation of both Aβ 40 and Aβ 42 has been shown to be dominated by this same process. 37,38 The high variability among technical repeats at low concentrations prevents data fitting to generate a quantitative description of the aggregation process for either peptide, as has previously been done for Aβ 40 and Aβ 42 . 37,38,62 However, such comprehensive characterization is not required for this study, for which the interactions between different Aβ alloforms, rather than the isolated behavior of any one peptide, is the primary focus.

In kinetic assays of the aggregation process in binary mixtures of Aβ 40 and either Aβ 37 or Aβ 38 , only a single transition was observed ( Fig. 4 ). This contrasts with the aggregation behavior of monomeric Aβ 40 /Aβ 42 mixtures, which produced a double-sigmoidal profile that was found to correspond to the self-assembly of each peptide on distinct timescales into segregated, homomolecular fibrils. 48 The effects of each peptide on the aggregation of the other were studied by holding the concentration of one peptide constant while varying the concentration of the other. The addition of Aβ 40 to solutions of Aβ 37 or Aβ 38 decreased the lag time before the single observed fluorescence transition ( Fig. 4a and b ). Conversely, with a constant concentration of Aβ 40 , the addition of either Aβ 37 or Aβ 38 resulted in a delay in aggregation ( Fig. 4c and d ). In both cases, the addition of the shorter alloform to Aβ 40 results in an increase in the intensity of ThT fluorescence, indicating that the shorter alloforms are aggregating concurrently with Aβ 40 , rather than at a later timepoint. The modulation of the kinetics of aggregation for both peptides in both Aβ 37 /Aβ 40 and Aβ 38 /Aβ 40 mixtures, as well as the fact that a monophasic aggregation profile is observed at all molar ratios tested despite the differing timescales of the independent aggregation of Aβ 37 and Aβ 38 compared to that of Aβ 40 , suggest that these peptides may co-aggregate to form some level of mixed aggregates. However, ThT fluorescence assays, which report only on total aggregate mass concentration, cannot distinguish co-aggregates from coexisting homomolecular fibrils.

The ultrastructure of the aggregates formed by these peptides, both alone and in mixtures, was investigated using cryo-TEM ( Fig. 5 ). Images were collected of fibrils produced by each peptide individually, as well as by those formed by equimolar Aβ 37 /Aβ 40 and Aβ 38 /Aβ 40 mixtures. Samples were prepared in the same manner as for the kinetic assays, with fibril formation monitored by ThT fluorescence. The samples were frozen on grids once the final fluorescence plateau was reached. All of the fibrils formed from a pure peptide solution display relatively consistent morphology. Moreover, these homomolecular fibrils were morphologically similar between peptides: the fibrils formed by Aβ 37 , Aβ 38 , and Aβ 40 had average helical half-pitch periods of 118 ± 30 nm, 131 ± 40 nm, and 125 ± 22 nm and average fibril diameters of 19 ± 6 nm, 15 ± 5 nm, and 18 ± 4, respectively. Notably, the morphology of the fibrils formed by each of these peptides was significantly different than that of the fibrils formed by Aβ 42 , which have a helical half pitch of 31 ± 17 nm. 48 The fibrils formed from binary mixtures, on the other hand, displayed distinct morphology. For both Aβ 37 /Aβ 40 and Aβ 38 /Aβ 40 mixtures, fibrils were observed with helical half-pitch periodicities that did not correspond to the fibrils formed independently by either of the peptides present in the reaction mixture. In both cases, the average fibril half-pitch period (160 ± 90 nm for Aβ 37 /Aβ 40 and 183 ± 106 for Aβ 38 /Aβ 40 ) was both significantly longer and more variable than for any of the homomolecular fibrils ( Fig. 5b ). Additionally, the average width of the fibrils formed in each binary mixture (21 ± 10 nm for Aβ 37 /Aβ 40 and 23 ± 12 for Aβ 38 /Aβ 40 ) was both larger and more variable than for either of the constituent peptides, although this was statistically significant only for Aβ 38 /Aβ 40 ( Fig. 5c ). The presence in both binary systems of fibrils with morphology distinct from those of homomolecular fibrils formed by either constituent peptide provided further evidence that some level of co-aggregation had occurred both between Aβ 37 and Aβ 40 and between Aβ 38 and Aβ 40 .

Following the investigation of the aggregation behavior of Aβ 40 with Aβ 37 and Aβ 38 , similar experiments were performed on two-peptide systems with Aβ 42 ( Fig. 6 ). Starting from monomeric Aβ 37 /Aβ 42 or Aβ 38 /Aβ 42 mixtures, two distinct transitions were observed in the curves as monitored by ThT fluorescence. Such biphasic aggregation profiles were previously observed for the aggregation of a mixture of Aβ 40 and Aβ 42 , which was found to correspond to aggregation into separate fibrils. 48 This indicates that the nature of the interactions of these shorter alloforms with Aβ 42 are quite different than with Aβ 40 . The biphasic profile suggests that two separate aggregation processes are occurring on discrete timescales, consistent with the formation of homomolecular fibrils.

There were nevertheless significant interactions between the two peptides present in both Aβ 37 /Aβ 42 and Aβ 38 /Aβ 42 mixtures, as evidenced by the changes to the timescale of aggregation of both peptides in the mixture. The presence of Aβ 42 strongly accelerated the aggregation of both Aβ 37 and Aβ 38 ( Fig. 6a and b , respectively) by dramatically shortening their lag phases. Notably, each of Aβ 37 and Aβ 38 clearly inhibited the aggregation of Aβ 42 ( Fig. 6c and d , respectively), although this effect is less dramatic than the reciprocal acceleration of both Aβ 37 and Aβ 38 aggregation by Aβ 42 .

The aggregation of Aβ 42 is known to proceed through three distinct processes: primary (non-fibril-catalyzed) nucleation, secondary (fibril-catalyzed) nucleation, and elongation. 37 To inhibit aggregation, an effector must perturb one or more of these processes. Inhibition of each of the processes affects the kinetics of aggregation in a distinct manner, 14,63 meaning that the change in the Aβ 42 curve shape in the presence of each of the shorter alloforms can, in principle, be used to determine which process is being inhibited. Using the AmyloFit program, 59 a model of secondary-nucleation-dominated aggregation was fit to the data shown in Fig. 6c and d ; the parameters corresponding to the rate of each process were, one-by-one, allowed to vary while all other parameters were held constant ( Fig. 7 ). This analysis shows that the observed changes to the curve shape of Aβ 42 aggregation in the presence of both Aβ 37 and Aβ 38 is poorly modeled by inhibition of primary nucleation ( Fig. 7a and d , respectively). However, the change to the Aβ 42 aggregation curve shape, although significant, is too small for the kinetic analysis to distinguish between inhibition of secondary nucleation ( Fig. 7b and e ) and inhibition of elongation ( Fig. 7c and f ). Nevertheless, this fitting indicates that the inhibition of Aβ 42 aggregation by both Aβ 37 and Aβ 38 involves interaction between the shorter peptide and the Aβ 42 fibril, as both secondary nucleation and elongation are fibril-catalyzed processes.

Having studied the aggregation in systems composed of two Aβ alloforms, both starting in a monomeric state, we next investigated whether any of these peptide mixtures displayed cross-seeding behavior. In aggregating systems driven by a fibril-catalyzed secondary nucleation process, as is the case for all Aβ alloforms studied here, the addition of pre-aggregated seed fibrils to a solution of monomer can accelerate aggregation by providing a catalytic surface for nucleation from the start of the reaction process. The self-seeding of both Aβ 42 and Aβ 40 is well established. 37,38,64 Although Aβ 40 and Aβ 42 have been shown to display some cross-seeding behavior, these effects are only evident at high seed concentrations (0.5 and 1 μM Aβ 40 seed added to 2 μM Aβ 42 monomer) and are much weaker than those observed for self-seeding. 48

In cross-seeding reactions, interactions between the monomeric peptide and the surface of the seed fibril can result in divergent kinetic outcomes. 65 The seed fibril can serve as a surface for heterogenous primary nucleation, wherein monomer adsorption by the fibril increases local monomer concentration, thereby catalyzing aggregation. 66,67 Conversely, higher-affinity monomer adsorption by the fibril surface leads to monomer sequestration, thus reducing the overall rate of aggregation, particularly during the fibril growth phase. 48,67 In previous cross-seeding reactions between Aβ 40 and Aβ 42 , Aβ 42 seeds were shown to have no effect on Aβ 40 aggregation; although high concentrations of Aβ 40 seeds (25–50%) were shown to affect Aβ 42 aggregation, these effects were much weaker than those of the self-seeding of Aβ 42 . 48

Here, we found that the aggregation of Aβ 37 is catalyzed by the presence of seeds of any of the four peptides ( Fig. 8a ). The effects were most dramatic for the self-seeding of Aβ 37 (purple) and Aβ 38 (blue), although they were nevertheless significant in all three cross-seeding cases. For the cross-seeding of Aβ 37 with Aβ 40 fibrils (green), the addition of seeds not only decreased the duration of the lag phase, but also reduced the slope of the curve during the aggregate growth phase. In contrast, either Aβ 38 (blue) or Aβ 42 (red) seed shortened the lag phase with minimal effects on the curve shape. This reduction in lag phase without a concomitant change in the curve shape suggests that the likely cause of the acceleration is the provision of a catalytic surface for the heterogeneous primary nucleation of Aβ 37 . However, at such long lag times, variability between experimental repeats is inevitable and prevents explicit verification of this proposed mechanism through fitting to kinetic models. Notably, the catalytic effect of Aβ 42 fibrils on Aβ 37 aggregation was smaller than that of monomeric Aβ 42 at comparable concentrations ( Fig. 6a ), indicating that monomer–monomer interactions are a significant factor in the catalysis of Aβ 37 aggregation by Aβ 42 . The fact that some cross-seeding behavior was observed, however, indicates that interactions between monomeric Aβ 37 and fibrillar Aβ 42 do also occur. This is consistent with the conclusions drawn from mechanistic fitting to the data of Aβ 42 aggregation in the presence of monomeric Aβ 37 ( Fig. 7a–c ).

As with Aβ 37 , the acceleration of Aβ 38 aggregation was stronger in the self-seeded case than for cross-seeding ( Fig. 8b ). At high concentrations of Aβ 38 seed, there was essentially no lag phase, with significant quantities of fibrils formed almost instantaneously. Having already found that Aβ 38 fibrils can seed the aggregation of monomeric Aβ 37 ( Fig. 8a ), the reciprocal effect is also observed, with the addition of Aβ 37 seeds accelerating Aβ 38 aggregation. For the cross-seeding of Aβ 38 with both Aβ 40 and Aβ 42 seed fibrils, a clear concentration-dependent decrease in the lag time was observed; in both cases, there was no perturbation to the aggregation curve shape.

For Aβ 40 , clear self-seeding behavior was observed ( Fig. 8c ), consistent with previous findings. 38,48 Additionally, clear reduction in the duration of the lag time was observed with the addition of both Aβ 37 and Aβ 38 seed fibrils, particularly at relatively high seed concentrations. As is the case for both Aβ 37 and Aβ 38 , however, this cross-seeding effect was again weaker than the self-seeding effect. Similar to what was observed for the seeding of Aβ 37 monomer with Aβ 40 fibrils, the addition of Aβ 37 fibrils to Aβ 40 monomer affected not only the lag phase but also the slope of the curve during the aggregate growth phase. Indeed, at low concentrations of Aβ 37 seed fibrils, this inhibitory effect was more significant than the reduction of the lag phase, resulting in an increase of the aggregation half-time relative to unseeded Aβ 40 .

Clear self-seeding behavior was observed for Aβ 42 , as has been reported previously; 37,48 however, no cross-seeding catalysis was observed with either Aβ 37 or Aβ 38 seed fibrils ( Fig. 8d ). Even at high concentrations of Aβ 37 and Aβ 38 seed fibrils, both the timescale and curve shape of Aβ 42 aggregation were completely unperturbed, indicating that these foreign aggregates are inert with respect to monomeric Aβ 42 , neither providing a surface for heterogeneous nucleation nor sequestering monomer. This suggests that the inhibition of Aβ 42 aggregation observed in the presence of Aβ 37 or Aβ 38 ( Fig. 6c and d , respectively) was caused by monomeric or oligomeric, rather than fibrillar, species. This is especially relevant given that, at the point in time at which Aβ 42 aggregates, both Aβ 37 and Aβ 38 will be in a primarily monomeric state, due to the relatively slow aggregation of both peptides.

Having characterized the effects that the presence of either monomeric or fibrillar species of each Aβ alloform had on aggregation kinetics of the others, we next studied the behavior of Aβ 37 or Aβ 38 in three-peptide monomeric mixtures with Aβ 40 and Aβ 42 . For both the Aβ 37 /Aβ 40 /Aβ 42 and the Aβ 38 /Aβ 40 /Aβ 42 mixtures, two discrete transitions in ThT fluorescence were observed, separated by an intermediate plateau phase ( Fig. 9a and c , respectively). This is consistent with two aggregation processes happening on distinct timescales. The intensity of the second transition in ThT fluorescence increased with increasing concentration of Aβ 37 or Aβ 38 , indicating that both peptides aggregate as part of the second, slower process. Based on the previous monomeric two-peptide aggregation kinetic assays ( Fig. 4 and 6 ), it is most likely that the first fluorescence transition here represents the aggregation of Aβ 42 , with the second transition showing the co-aggregation of Aβ 40 and Aβ 37 or Aβ 38 .

To analyze the identity and composition of the peptide aggregates that have formed during each transition, analytical HPLC was used to determine the concentration of each peptide over the time-course of the aggregation of an equimolar three-peptide mixture ( Fig. 10 ). To characterize the composition of fibrillar species, aliquots were removed during the initial lag phase ( t L ) and each plateau phase ( t P1 and t P2 ) ( Fig. 10b and c for mixtures including Aβ 37 and Aβ 38 , respectively). The fibrils present in these aliquots were isolated by centrifugation, washed to remove any oligomers associated with the fibril surface, then dissolved and injected on an HPLC instrument. In both three-peptide mixtures, it was found that the fibrils present in the intermediate plateau phase were primarily composed of Aβ 42 , while the fibrils in the final plateau phase were composed of all three peptides. These data are supported by the complementary analysis of the peptide composition of the supernatants ( Fig. 10d and e ), for which additional aliquots were taken during each aggregate growth phase ( t G1 and t G2 ). For both Aβ 37 /Aβ 40 /Aβ 42 and Aβ 38 /Aβ 40 /Aβ 42 mixtures, it was found that the concentration of monomeric Aβ 42 decreased during the first transition in ThT fluorescence and was undetectable by the intermediate plateau phase. During the second transition phase, the concentration of both Aβ 40 and either Aβ 37 or Aβ 38 decreased. At the final plateau phase, the majority of peptides were converted to fibrils and the monomer concentration was below the detection limit of analytical HPLC. This indicates that, in these three-peptide mixtures, the behavior of each peptide is consistent with the behavior to in two-peptide systems, with Aβ 42 forming fibrils during the first transition and Aβ 40 co-aggregating with Aβ 37 or Aβ 38 during the second transition.

Despite aggregating separately from Aβ 42 , the presence of either Aβ 37 or Aβ 38 perturbed the kinetics of Aβ 42 aggregation, as was previously observed in two-peptide systems ( Fig. 6c and d ). The half-time of Aβ 42 aggregation increased with increasing concentration of either Aβ 37 or Aβ 38 ( Fig. 9b and d , respectively), with the half-time of Aβ 42 aggregation defined here as the time at which the fluorescence intensity reached half-way between the initial baseline and the intermediate plateau. This shows that Aβ 37 /Aβ 42 , Aβ 38 /Aβ 42 , and Aβ 40 /Aβ 42 (ref. 48 ) interactions observed in two-peptide systems persist in three-peptide systems.

Finally, the aggregation behavior in monomeric mixtures of all four alloforms was studied. First, the aggregation of 3 μM Aβ 42 in mixtures with varying concentrations of Aβ 37 , Aβ 38 , and Aβ 40 at an equimolar ratio was characterized ( Fig. 11 ). For all four-peptide mixtures, two distinct transitions in ThT fluorescence intensity were observed. The intensity of the second transition (which was absent in a solution containing only Aβ 42 ) scaled with increasing concentration of the Aβ 37 /Aβ 38 /Aβ 40 mixture, while the intensity of the first transition did not. This indicates that all three of the shorter Aβ alloforms may form co-aggregates, while Aβ 42 aggregates first, forming separate fibrils. As would be expected given the behavior observed in three-peptide mixtures, the aggregation of Aβ 42 was perturbed by the presence of shorter Aβ alloforms despite the slower aggregation of these peptides, with increasing concentrations of the short-alloform mixture leading to longer Aβ 42 aggregation half-times ( Fig. 11b ).

We next characterized the relative effects of each of the shorter Aβ alloforms on the aggregation of Aβ 42 , with an aim to determine whether specific ratios of these alloforms would maximally affect Aβ 42 aggregation. For this, the aggregation of 3 μM Aβ 42 was studied in the presence of a constant total concentration (6 μM) of mixtures of Aβ 37 , Aβ 38 , and Aβ 40 , with these three peptides in varying ratios ( Fig. 12 ). For each ratio tested, only two fluorescence transitions were observed, providing further evidence that the three shortest alloforms co-aggregate irrespective of their ratio. Both the timescale and intensity of the second transition varied based on the ratio of Aβ 37 , Aβ 38 , and Aβ 40 , due to the differing aggregation propensities and ThT quantum yielded of each peptide. The aggregation of Aβ 42 was found to be inhibited by all solutions tested, irrespective of the peptide ratios, although to varying extents. Included in this study were 6 μM each Aβ 37 , Aβ 38 , and Aβ 40 alone, to allow for side-by-side comparison of the degree to which each alloform inhibits Aβ 42 aggregation. Of the three, Aβ 38 inhibited the aggregation of Aβ 42 to the greatest degree, followed by Aβ 37 and Aβ 40 . This was found to be reproducible between repeats of the whole experiment. Notably, mixtures of all three peptides produced a stronger inhibitory effect than any single peptide alone. Although the relative strength of inhibition of these different mixtures was not found to be highly reproducible between repeats of the experiment, mixtures with higher concentrations of Aβ 38 generally exhibited stronger inhibitory effects than did mixtures with low concentrations of Aβ 38 . Still, Aβ 38 alone was not the most effective, with the strongest inhibition observed at the 2 : 3 : 1 and 1 : 4 : 1 ratios of Aβ 37 : Aβ 38 : Aβ 40 .

## Discussion
The results of this study points to significant cross-reactivity in quaternary mixtures of Aβ 42 and shorter alloforms, beyond those observed in binary mixtures. 48 Notably, both monomeric Aβ 37 and Aβ 38 appear to interact with Aβ 42 in much the same manner as does monomeric Aβ 40 . Most fundamentally, all three of the shortest alloforms aggregate independently of Aβ 42 , giving rise to two distinct fluorescence transitions. Furthermore, similar reciprocal kinetic effects are observed in binary monomeric mixtures of Aβ 42 with each of the three shorter alloforms. As was found here for both Aβ 37 and Aβ 38 , the presence of monomeric Aβ 42 accelerates the aggregation of Aβ 40 by significantly shortening the lag phase, 48 although this effect is significantly more pronounced with Aβ 37 and Aβ 38 , which both aggregate much more slowly than Aβ 40 . Additionally, the presence of any of the three shortest alloforms serves to inhibit the aggregation of Aβ 42 . In each case, this effect is weaker than the reciprocal Aβ 42 -induced acceleration of aggregation of the shorter alloform.

The cross-seeding between Aβ 42 and each of the shorter alloforms showed a stronger dependence on alloform length. As reported by Cukalevski et al. , the addition of Aβ 42 seeds to Aβ 40 monomers results in minimal change to the kinetics of Aβ 40 aggregation. 48 This contrasts with the cross-seeding interactions between Aβ 42 seeds and both Aβ 37 and Aβ 38 monomers, for which a clear Aβ 42 -concentration-dependent decrease in the aggregation half-time of the shorter alloform was observed in both cases. Furthermore, Cukalevski et al. reported that the addition of high concentrations of Aβ 40 seeds to Aβ 42 monomers leads to a moderate reduction of both the lag time and the rate of Aβ 42 aggregation during the fibril growth phase (these converse effects largely cancel out, leaving the half-time of Aβ 42 essentially unchanged). 48 This behavior differs from the interactions observed here for the cross-seeding of Aβ 42 monomers with either Aβ 37 or Aβ 38 , for which even high seed concentrations had no effect on the kinetics of Aβ 42 aggregation.

The results of this study serve to extend our understanding of interactions between Aβ alloforms by investigating the aggregation behavior of tri- and tetra-molecular mixtures. The fact that Aβ 37 , Aβ 38 , and Aβ 40 each affected Aβ 42 aggregation to a different extent indicates that inhibition of Aβ 42 aggregation by these shorter alloforms is not simply due to non-specific interactions with Aβ 42 , but rather includes some level of sequence specificity. That Aβ 38 is a more potent inhibitor of Aβ 42 aggregation than are either Aβ 37 or Aβ 40 indicates that this effect is not directly correlated to alloform length. Likewise, this inhibition does not appear to be correlated with aggregation propensity, as Aβ 37 and Aβ 40 inhibited Aβ 42 aggregation to a similar extent, despite Aβ 40 displaying a much higher intrinsic aggregation rate than Aβ 37 . Determination of the various factors, including peptide length and sequence, that affect the relative inhibitory potency of these shorter alloforms towards Aβ 42 aggregation would provide greater physical insight into the interactions that underlie this inhibition.

Notably, the results of this study indicate that, in addition to being alloform-specific, the effect of short Aβ alloforms on the aggregation of Aβ 42 is inherently cooperative. Were this inhibition non-cooperative, it would be expected that the decrease in Aβ 42 aggregation would simply scale with the relative concentrations of the short alloforms. Instead, a mixture of these shorter alloforms affected the rate of Aβ 42 aggregation more significantly than any single alloform independently, with the strongest inhibition seen at the 2 : 3 : 1 and 1 : 4 : 1 Aβ 37 : Aβ 38 : Aβ 40 ratios. While the underlying molecular interactions that give rise to this cooperative inhibition are not readily evident, these results further buttress the conclusion that inhibition of Aβ 42 aggregation by shorter Aβ alloforms is sequence specific. One possible explanation for inhibition observed in certain quaternary mixtures may be the formation of mixed oligomers that cannot readily convert to fibrils and that compete for catalytic sites on the fibril surface with more conversion-competent homomolecular oligomers. 68 Although Aβ 42 in heteromolecular mixtures aggregates at reduced rate compared to pure Aβ 42 , it seems to promote nucleation of Aβ 37 , Aβ 38 and Aβ 40 in these mixed oligomers, and after Aβ 42 has formed homomolecular fibrils, these three peptides seem form joint fibrils with different morphology than any of the pure fibrils of Aβ 37 , Aβ 38 and Aβ 40 .

When studied alone as single peptides at a range of concentrations, Aβ 38 appears to aggregate much more slowly than Aβ 37 . The origin of this difference is not clear but may be a consequence of primary or secondary nucleation being less effective with the extra Gly residue at the C-terminus of Aβ 38 . In general, longer sequences aggregate more slowly if the additional length difference lies in a non-amyloidogenic segment. 33,69,70

These results suggest that in the brain extracellular fluids, where a number of different short Aβ alloforms are present, the disease-associated aggregation of Aβ 1–42 may in fact be modulated by these short alloforms and, furthermore, that the rate of Aβ 1–42 aggregation may be sensitive to specific ratios of these alloforms. The relevance of these findings is further underscored by the disease-promoting effect of familial AD-causing presenilin mutations, which lead to a loss of Aβ 1–37 and Aβ 1–38 whilst affecting neither Aβ 1–40 nor Aβ 1–42 production. 71

## Conclusions
In this study, we show that the Aβ alloforms Aβ 37 and Aβ 38 both aggregate through a secondary nucleation driven process to form β-sheet rich fibrils. The aggregation of both of these peptides is comparable to the well-characterized aggregation processes of Aβ 40 and Aβ 42 , although the aggregation of the shorter two alloforms is significantly slower, which is consistent with their reduced aggregation propensity in vivo . Furthermore, we find that the aggregation of all four Aβ alloforms is highly sensitive to the presence of other alloforms. Both Aβ 37 and Aβ 38 co-aggregate with Aβ 40 , forming fibrils that are ultrastructurally distinct from the fibrils formed by either of the constituent peptides alone. Furthermore, the kinetics of aggregation in these binary mixtures is highly dependent on the ratio of Aβ 37 /Aβ 40 or Aβ 38 /Aβ 40 present in solution. In contrast to their co-aggregation with Aβ 40 , we find that both Aβ 37 and Aβ 38 aggregate independently from Aβ 42 . There is nevertheless significant kinetic modulation between Aβ 42 and both Aβ 37 and Aβ 38 , with the shorter alloforms impeding the aggregation of Aβ 42 in a concentration-dependent manner and Aβ 42 reciprocally accelerating the aggregation of the shorter alloforms. Finally, we find that the aggregation of Aβ 42 is sensitive to the specific ratio of shorter alloforms present, indicating a level of sequence specificity in these interactions; we furthermore demonstrate that a mixture of Aβ 37 , Aβ 38 , and Aβ 40 more potently affects Aβ 42 aggregation than any one of the shorter alloforms alone, indicating that this inhibition is inherently cooperative.

These results demonstrate that interactions between Aβ alloforms significantly modulate the aggregation behavior of these peptides in vitro . As the presence of Aβ 38 has been shown to attenuate Aβ 42 fibril formation and deposition in vivo , 49,50 it is likely that the interactions described here are pertinent to the biological behavior of these peptides. Indeed, short Aβ alloforms, which make up as much as 90% of the Aβ peptide present in the extracellular fluid of the brain, may play a pathologically relevant role in moderating the aggregation of Aβ 42 . These results are relevant not only to understanding the pathogenesis of AD, but also to the development of AD therapeutics. As modulation of γ-secretase activity is increasingly being proposed as a promising route to AD therapeutics, 72–74 an understanding of how different Aβ alloforms—and how different combinations of these alloforms—affect pathological Aβ 42 aggregation is becoming increasingly important.

## Materials and methods
The genes encoding wild-type Aβ(M1-42), Aβ(M1-40), Aβ(M1-38), and Aβ(M1-37) (referred to herein as Aβ 42 , Aβ 40 , Aβ 38 , and Aβ 37 , respectively) were produced by overlapping PCR and cloned into the PetSac vector. 58 The peptides were expressed in E. coli strains BL21 Star (DE3) pLysS (for Aβ 42 , Aβ 40 , and Aβ 37 ) or BL21-Gold (DE3) pLysS (for Aβ 38 ). Cells were cultured in LB medium with 50 mg L −1 ampicillin and (for BL21 Star cells) 30 mg L −1 chloramphenicol. Well-isolated bacterial colonies were used to inoculate 50 mL cultures grown in 250 mL baffled flasks at 37 °C with 130 rpm shaking for ca. 7 h. Once an OD of 0.7–1.0 was reached, 500 μL of these cultures were then added to 500 mL LB medium (containing the relevant antibiotics, as detailed above) in 2 L baffled flasks, which were grown at 37 °C with 125 rpm shaking for ca. 15 h. Cells were then harvested by centrifugation at 6000 × g for 10 min at 4 °C.

The peptides were isolated from inclusion bodies after iterative sonication and centrifugation. The inclusion bodies were dissolved in 8 M urea in 10 mM Tris–HCL, pH 8.5, 1 mM EDTA, and the peptide purified by ion exchange chromatography on a DEAE cellulose resin, as previously described. 58 The purity of the eluted fractions was assessed by SDS-PAGE. The purest fractions were pooled. Monomer isolation and removal of inclusion-body-bound proteins was achieved by filtration using 30 kDa MWCO filters, and size exclusion chromatography on a 26 × 600 mm Superdex 75 column. The peptide was then aliquoted, frozen and lyophilized, and stored at −20 °C.

To isolate pure monomer, Aβ peptides were subjected to size-exclusion chromatography (SEC) immediately before preparing aggregation kinetic assays. Aliquots of purified, lyophilized Aβ were dissolved in 1.0 mL 6 M GuHCl, injected on a Superdex 75 10/300 GL column, and eluted with an isocratic 0.7 mL min −1 flow of 20 mM sodium phosphate buffer, pH 7.4, with 200 μM EDTA and 0.02% NaN 3 . Typical retention times were between 19 and 21 minutes for all peptides. The center of the monomer peak was collected on ice using low-binding Eppendorf tubes. The concentration of purified peptide was determined by integrating the absorbance at 280 nm of the collected peak, using ε 280 = 1400 L mol −1 cm −1 (based on the presence of a single tyrosine residue in each alloform). Concentration determination in this manner is accurate within ±20%.

A dilution series was prepared from the SEC-purified peptide. First, thioflavin T (ThT, Calbiochem) was added to the sample from a concentrated stock solution (filtered through 0.2 μm filter) to a final concentration of 20 μM. The dilution series was then prepared from this peptide solution, using 20 mM sodium phosphate buffer, pH 7.4, with 200 μM EDTA, 0.02% NaN 3 , and 20 μM ThT (at this concentration, ThT fluorescence was found to scale linearly with aggregate concentration for all alloforms, Fig. S5 † ). All samples were prepared in low-binding tubes on ice (Axygen). The samples were loaded from low to high peptide concentration, with five wells per sample and 90 μL per well, into a 96-well, half-area, clear bottomed, PEG-coated, black polystyrene plate (Corning 3881), which was subsequently sealed. The whole setup was repeated at least three times for each peptide.

All four peptides were purified separately by SEC, as described above. ThT was added from a concentrated stock solution to each of the purified peptides to a final concentration of 20 μM. Additionally, a dilution solution of 20 mM sodium phosphate buffer, pH 7.4, with 200 μM EDTA, 0.02% NaN 3 , and 20 μM ThT was prepared. The purified peptide solutions and the dilution solution were combined in varying quantities to give the desired molar ratios and total concentrations. The samples were then loaded from low to high concentration of the most aggregation-prone peptide in the mixture, with four to five 90 μL wells per sample, into a 96-well plate (Corning 3881), which was subsequently sealed. The whole setup was repeated at least three times for each peptide combination.

Seed fibrils were made from SEC-purified peptide, with fibril formation monitored by ThT fluorescence, as described above. Seed fibrils were removed once the fluorescence plateau was reached, approximately 20 hours for Aβ 37 , 48 hours for Aβ 38 , 5 hours for Aβ 40 , and 1 hour for Aβ 42 . These seed fibrils were then added in varying concentrations to aliquots of a solution of SEC-purified monomeric peptide, to which ThT had been added to a final concentration of 20 μM. For all seeded experiments, the aggregation of a set of unseeded control samples was run in parallel to the seeded reactions. Four technical replicates of each sample were then plated into a 96-well plate (Corning 3881). The whole setup was repeated at least twice for each peptide combination.

ThT fluorescence was measured using a FLUOstar Omega or FLUOstar Optima plate reader (BMG Labtech) at 37 °C under quiescent conditions. Fluorescence was measured through the bottom of the plate using an excitation filter of 440 nm and an emission filter of 480 nm, with measurements taken every 60–120 s (depending on the aggregation propensity of the alloform being studied).

All kinetic analyses were performed using the free online program AmyloFit ( www.amylofit.ch.cam.ac.uk ). 59 To facilitate half-time determination and fitting of various mechanistic models, fluorescence data were normalized, using both a zero-point offset (in case of seeded experiments) and end-point normalization. For data sets with multiple fluorescence transitions, only the first transition, corresponding to Aβ 42 aggregation, was normalized; for this, the intermediate plateau phase was used as the aggregation endpoint.

Aggregation half-times were determined by performing a linear fit to the normalized ThT fluorescence data for the period in which the signal intensity was between 0.4 and 0.6. The half-time was taken to be the time at which the linear fit equals 0.5. When applicable, the scaling exponent was determined by plotting the half-time versus the relevant starting monomer concentration and fitting to this data a power function t 1/2 = α [ m ] γ 0 where t 1/2 is the half-time, [ m ] 0 is the starting monomer concentration, α is a proportionality constant, and γ is the scaling exponent.

The fitting of mechanistic models was used to assess which of the microscopic Aβ 42 aggregation steps are perturbed in Aβ 42 /Aβ 38 and Aβ 42 /Aβ 37 binary mixtures. For this, the data from the sample containing only Aβ 42 was fitted first, using the integrated rate law

for which the parameters are defined k ∞ = 2 k + [ P ] ∞ were [ m ] 0 is the initial monomer concentration; [ P ] 0 is the fibril number at the start of the reaction; [ P ] ∞ is the fibril number at equilibrium, when the reaction has reached completion (see ref. 38 for the detailed expression of [ P ] ∞ ); [ M ] 0 is the fibril mass concentration at the start of the reaction; [ M ] ∞ is the fibril mass concentration at equilibrium; k n , k 2 , and k + are the rate constants for primary nucleation, secondary nucleation, and elongation, respectively; K M is the saturation constant for secondary nucleation; and n c and n 2 are the reaction orders of primary and secondary nucleation, respectively.

For this fitting, the primary and secondary nucleation reaction orders ( n c and n 2 , respectively) both set to 2, based on previously reported data for Aβ 42 under similar conditions, 37,41 and the initial seed concentration was set to 0. The rate constants k + , k n , and k 2 (corresponding to elongation, primary nucleation, and secondary nucleation, respectively) were simultaneously fitted to the data, thus accounting for any minor differences in the starting monomer concentration. For the analysis of each binary aggregation data set, three different fits were performed with one rate constant as a variable parameter and the other two rate constants fixed to the values obtained for Ab 42 alone. The comparison of the three fits reveals whether selective perturbation of a given process could accurately model the observed inhibition of Aβ 42 aggregation.

The samples used for monomer depletion studies were prepared and incubated as described above, with aggregation monitored by ThT fluorescence. All samples were prepared to a concentration of 3 μM each Aβ 42 , Aβ 40 , and either Aβ 38 or Aβ 37 and plated in 100 μL aliquots. One sample was removed into a low-binding tube (Axygen) at the start of incubation, with additional samples removed during the initial lag phase, the first fluorescence transition, the intermediate plateau phase, the second fluorescence transition, and the final plateau phase. In addition to the removed samples, two additional samples were left in the plate to monitor the entire aggregation process.

Upon removal, each sample was centrifugated at 20 000 × g for 5 min at room temperature to sediment the aggregated peptide. Following centrifugation, the upper 50 μL of the supernatant was removed and injected on an analytical HPLC instrument (Agilent 1100), equipped with a C8 column (Agilent ZORBAX 300SB, 200 × 4.6 mm), run at a flow rate of 1 mL min −1 at 70 °C. The mobile phases used were (solvent A) 0.1% formic acid in water and (solvent B) 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. A linear gradient of 15–30% B over 10 min, followed by an isocratic flow of 30% B for an additional five min was used. The approximate retention times for each peptide were as follows: Aβ 42 = 13.7 min, Aβ 40 = 12.0 min, Aβ 38 = 10.6 min, Aβ 37 = 10.8 min.

Samples were prepared and incubated as described above, with aggregation monitored by ThT fluorescence. All samples were prepared to a concentration of 3 μM each of Aβ 42 , Aβ 40 , and either Aβ 38 or Aβ 37 , and plated in 125 μL aliquots. Samples were removed at the start of incubation, during the intermediate plateau phase, and the final plateau phase. At each time point, the contents of two wells were removed and combined to give a total sample volume of 250 μL. In addition to the removed samples, two additional samples were left in the plate to monitor the aggregation process.

Upon removal, samples were filtrated through 0.2 μm spin filters (VIVASPIN 500) at 15 000 × g for 5 min at room temperature to trap the fibrils. The filter-trapped fibrils were then washed five times with 500 μL ultrapure water (to a total wash volume of 10x the sample volume) to remove any monomeric or oligomeric peptide on the fibril and filter surface. After each wash, the sample was centrifugated at 15 000 × g for 5 min at room temperature, leaving a retentate volume of ca. 25 μL. After the final wash, the retentate was mixed in a 1 : 3 ratio with 6 M GuHCl to dissolve the fibrils for 15 min before being injected on an analytical HPLC instrument. HPLC was performed as described above.

For Cryo-EM samples, monomer isolation for all peptides was performed as described above. Solutions were prepared with a total monomeric peptide concentration of 10 μM and incubated in the same manner as for the kinetic assays, with aggregation monitored by ThT fluorescence. Samples were taken once the final fluorescence plateau was reached. Specimens were prepared for imaging in a controlled environment vitrification system (CEVS) to maintain stable temperature and to minimize solution loss. The sample was prepared as a thin liquid film, <300 nm thick, on lacey carbon filmed copper grids. This was plunged into liquid ethane at −180 °C to vitrify the sample; this minimizes water crystallization as well as component segmentation and rearrangement, thus maintaining original microstructures. The vitrified sample was stored under liquid nitrogen until imaged. The grid was transferred into the electron microscope (JEM 2200FS) using a Fischione Model 2550 cryo transfer tomography holder. The microscope was equipped with an in-column energy filter (Omega filter), thus allowing for zero-loss imaging. The acceleration voltage was 200 kV and zero-loss images were recorded digitally with a TVIPS F416 camera using SerialEM under low dose conditions and with a 30 eV energy selecting slit in place.

To quantify fibril ultrastructure, the node-to-node distance and fibril diameter were measured using ImageJ (version 2.1.0/1.53c, NIH). For each sample, at least 50 measurements were performed, measuring at least fifteen total fibrils from five different images, each taken from different parts of the sample grid. Measurements are presented in boxplots with Tukey whiskers, with the median represented by the center line, the box containing the 25th–75th percentiles, and individually plotted points representing statistical outliers. Statistical significance was assessed using a one-way ANOVA followed by Dunnett's post-hoc test, with p < 0.05 considered significant. All statistical analysis was performed in GraphPad Prism (version 9.0.2).

## Data availability
All data presented in this article will be made available upon reasonable request.

## Author contributions
H. Z. and S. L. designed the study. G. A. B., K. S. and S. L. performed the experiments. G. A. B. and A. J. D. analyzed data. G. A. B. wrote the paper with input from all co-authors.

## Conflicts of interest
H. Z. has served at scientific advisory boards for Eisai, Denali, Roche Diagnostics, Wave, Samumed, Siemens Healthineers, Pinteon Therapeutics, Nervgen, AZTherapies and CogRx, has given lectures in symposia sponsored by Cellectricon, Fujirebio, Alzecure and Biogen, and is a co-founder of Brain Biomarker Solutions in Gothenburg AB (BBS), which is a part of the GU Ventures Incubator Program (outside submitted work).