# Title
TREM2-independent microgliosis promotes tau-mediated neurodegeneration in the presence of ApoE4

# Abstract
In addition to tau and Aβ pathologies, inflammation plays an important role in Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Variants in APOE and TREM2 increase AD risk. ApoE4 exacerbates tau-linked neurodegeneration and inflammation in P301S tau mice and removal of microglia blocks tau-dependent neurodegeneration. Microglia adopt a heterogeneous population of transcriptomic states in response to pathology, at least some of which are dependent on TREM2. Previously we reported that knockout (KO) of TREM2 attenuated neurodegeneration in P301S mice that express mouse Apoe. Because of the possible common pathway of ApoE and TREM2 in AD, we tested whether TREM2 KO (T2KO) would block neurodegeneration in P301S Tau mice expressing ApoE4 (TE4), similar to that observed with microglial depletion. Surprisingly, we observed exacerbated neurodegeneration and tau pathology in TE4-T2KO vs. TE4 mice, despite decreased TREM2-dependent microgliosis. Our results suggest that tau pathology dependent microgliosis that is TREM2-independent facilitates tau-mediated neurodegeneration in the presence of ApoE4.

## INTRODUCTION
Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) is the most common cause of dementia and is characterized by extracellular plaques mainly composed of aggregated Aβ peptide, and intraneuronal neurofibrillary tangles and dystrophic neurites that contain aggregated, hyperphosphorylated tau protein 1 , 2 . Tau pathology, and not Aβ, strongly correlates with local brain atrophy and neuronal death. APOE4 , the strongest genetic risk factor for AD, has an established role in promoting Aβ aggregation into amyloid plaques. However, a myriad of other effects of APOE4 on the blood brain barrier, glucose and lipid metabolism, and exacerbated inflammation may also contribute to the link between APOE4 and AD, including the exacerbation of tau-associated neurodegeneration and inflammation 3 – 6 .

Neuroinflammation is a prominent aspect of AD and primary tauopathies and is implicated as a driver of tau-dependent neurodegeneration in animal models 7 . APOE4 is associated with augmented inflammatory astrocytic and microglial phenotypes, whereas knockout of Apoe strongly protects against neurodegeneration and inflammatory gene expression in the P301S mouse model, 6 , 8 . In vivo , ablation of microglia in P301S mice expressing APOE4 (TE4) prevented neurodegeneration and reduced tau phosphorylation 8 . The functional state of microglia, rather than their overall abundance, affects neurodegeneration as protein expression markers such as CD68, Clec7a, or P2ry12 appear to correlate with tau-dependent neurodegeneration more robustly than simply microglial number. Single-cell RNAseq (scRNAseq) and immune profiling experiments have identified a number of microglial transcriptional profiles in the context of neurodegeneration 9 – 11 . Whether particular microglial transcriptional programs are driving neurodegeneration versus responding to neurodegeneration is unclear.

TREM2 is a critical regulator of a Cd9+Clec7a+Cd11c+ microglial state that was initially described in amyloid mouse models as “disease-associated microglia” (DAM) 12 . Studies in mouse models of amyloid deposition demonstrated a pivotal function for TREM2, and by extension the “DAM” state, in the microglial response to amyloid and that TREM2 signaling is protective in decreasing Aβ-mediated local injury 13 – 17 . Loss of TREM2 or expression of AD-associated TREM2 variants are linked to increased seeding and spreading of neuritic plaque phosphorylated tau, and exacerbated neuronal injury and tau pathology in mixed amyloid-tau transgenic models 18 – 20 , suggesting a role for TREM2 in suppressing Aβ-driven tau pathology. Conversely, we and others have previously shown that loss of TREM2 or expression of AD-associated TREM2 variants attenuate microgliosis and neurodegeneration in a mouse model of primary tauopathy 21 – 23 , raising the hypothesis that the reactive microglial state in response to amyloid was associated with protective effects but that reactive microglia in the context of tauopathy drove neurodegeneration. However, recent reports found that although TREM2 deficiency reduced Cd11c+ reactive microglia, loss of TREM2 was not protective against neurodegeneration in Grn−/− or hTDP-43 mice 24 , 25 . Interestingly, Grn−/− and Trem2−/− mice independently exhibit deficiencies in lipid metabolism and TREM2 can directly bind hTDP-43, which may be important for its phagocytic clearance.

ApoE4 may exert toxic gain-of-function phenotypes relative to ApoE3 and ApoE2 that could cause general dysfunction of ApoE-related pathways. Given the reported overlap between TREM2 and ApoE in AD and microglial function, we decided to test whether and how TREM2 deficiency would affect tau-dependent neurodegeneration in the context of ApoE4. We hypothesized that Trem2 KO would dampen microglial reactivity to attenuate the detrimental effect of ApoE4 on tau-dependent neurodegeneration. Surprisingly, we found exacerbated neurodegeneration and tauopathy in Trem2-deficient TE4 mice despite decreased detection of DAM-like, TREM2-dependent microglial profiles. Moreover, we observed TREM2-independent increases in microglial expression of lysosome-associated genes in TE4 mice.

## RESULTS
To investigate the interplay between TREM2 and ApoE4 on tauopathy, inflammation, and neurodegeneration, we used the P301S-tau mouse model. By 9.5 months-of-age, this model develops strong tau hyperphosphorylation and aggregation, gliosis, and synaptic and neuronal loss in the hippocampus and entorhinal/piriform cortex (EC/PC) 26 . We generated P301S mice on either a human ApoE4-KI (TE4) or ApoE-KO (TEKO) background with and without TREM2 to generate 4 groups of mice: TE4, TEKO, TE4-T2KO, TEKO-T2KO. No change in brain volume was detected among these four groups at 3 months-of-age, prior to neurodegeneration in this model ( Suppl.Fig.1B ).

At 9.5 months-of-age, ApoE-KO strongly attenuated brain atrophy in P301S mice compared with mice expressing ApoE4 ( Fig.1A – D ), similar to prior reports 6 , 8 , 27 . Previously, we found that 9.5 month old P301S mice expressing mouse Apoe with Trem2 deletion develop significantly less EC/PC atrophy than P301S expressing TREM2 23 . Surprisingly, volumetric analysis revealed marked hippocampal volume loss (~27%) and EC/PC volume loss (~35%) in the TE4-T2KO compared to TEKO and TEKO-T2KO mice ( Fig.1A – C ). Interestingly, TE4-T2KO displayed even smaller hippocampus and EC/PC volumes compared to TE4 mice. Additionally, the dentate gyrus granule cell layer was significantly thinner in TE4 mice compared to TEKO mice, independent of TREM2 deletion ( Fig.1D ).

We next measured plasma protein levels of neurofilament light chain (NfL), a marker of neuroaxonal damage and neurodegeneration 28 . We observed a significant increase in plasma NfL in TE4 compared to TEKO independent of TREM2 ( Fig.1E ). NfL levels were barely detectable in age-matched littermates without the tau mutation ( Suppl.Fig.1C ). NfL levels did not differ between the TE4 and TE4-T2KO groups, possibly because levels had reached a plateau. NfL levels also did not differ in these groups at 3 months-of-age, prior to neurodegeneration ( Suppl.Fig.1C ). We measured the effect of TREM2 on synaptic loss in TE4 mice by quantifying hippocampal postsynaptic (PSD95) puncta. We observed decreased PSD95 puncta in TE4 mice compared to TEKO mice, independent of the presence of TREM2 ( Fig.1F , G ). Thus, in the presence of ApoE4, TREM2 deletion increases tau-mediated brain atrophy.

To determine whether the TREM2-independent effect of ApoE4 on brain atrophy and synaptic loss is associated with increased tau pathology, we immunostained brain sections from these mice for p-tau using AT8 (pS202/pT205) and AT180 (pT231) and pathological tau conformations using MC1. We observed a significant increase in hippocampal AT8 ( Fig.2A , D ) and AT180 ( Fig.2B , E ) staining in TE4-T2KO compared to the other groups and an increase in hippocampal MC1 staining in TE4-T2KO compared to TEKO and TEKO-T2KO ( Fig.2C , F ). No significant difference in AT8 staining in the EC/PC was observed ( Fig.2A , G ), but AT180 and MC1 staining were increased in TE4-T2KO EC/PC compared to TEKO and TEKO-T2KO ( Fig.2B , C , H , I ). Surprisingly, while there is increased MC1 staining in TE4 mice versus TEKO and TEKO-T2KO in the EC/PC ( Fig.2KC , I ), p-tau staining did not differ in the hippocampus/entorhinal cortex of TE4 versus TEKO or TEKO-T2KO groups, which differs from our previous findings 6 , 8 . We performed Western blot analysis for AT8 and AT180 pTau markers in the RIPA and Sarkosyl-insoluble fractions ( Fig.2J – Q ) as well as ELISA analysis of soluble and insoluble phosphorylated and total tau levels ( Fig.2R – U ). No differences were observed between groups in the RIPA and soluble fractions for pTau and total tau. However, insoluble pTau and total tau levels were increased in TE4-T2KO ( Fig.2O , P , Q , T ) and TE4 mice ( Fig.2O , T , U ) compared to TEKO and/or TEKO-T2KO mice, confirming an increase of aggregated pTau and tau in TE4, that is not attenuated by TREM2 deletion. Finally, we analyzed hippocampal pTau staining patterns ( Fig.2V ; type1–type4) that are associated with progressively more advanced pathological tau/neurodegeneration stages 6 , 8 . TEKO mice were highly enriched with type 1 & 2 patterns, which represents earlier pathological tau stages. In contrast, TE4 mice had predominantly type 3 & 4 patterns, which are associated with more advanced tau stages and neurodegeneration ( Fig.2V ). Remarkably, TREM2 deletion in TEKO mice strongly blocked the progression of pathological tau stages, resulting in almost exclusively type 1 & 2 patterns in these mice. While more subtle, there is a switch from type 3 to type 4 pattern in TE4-T2KO mice vs. TE4 mice. This p-tau pattern analysis confirms that ApoE4 augments p-tau pathology and highlights the complex role of TREM2 on tau pathology. Interestingly, we 23 and others 29 did not observe increased p-tau pathology in P301S mice expressing murine ApoE that lacked TREM2, suggesting that human ApoE4 has a different impact on tau pathology than mouse ApoE used in the previous studies.

Microglial reactivity plays a crucial role in driving tau pathology and tau-mediated neurodegeneration 8 , 30 , which is exacerbated by ApoE4 6 and dependent on TREM2 22 , 23 . To decipher specific microglial states associated with neurodegeneration, we isolated microglial nuclei from the hippocampus of E4, TE4 and TEKO in the presence or absence of Trem2 (T2KO) ( Fig.3A ) using immunolabeling for PU.1 and performed snRNAseq ( Fig.3B , Suppl.Fig.3 & Table 1 ). We identified ten clusters after analysis of differentially expressed marker genes. Most nuclei to a varying degree expressed Cx3cr1 , Csf1r , and Hexb mRNA ( Fig.3D ). These markers were highly expressed in three clusters, which were largely homogenous in their gene expression, and generally resembled transcriptomic states colloquially referred to as “homeostatic.” ( Fig.3E ). Homeostatic microglia represented the largest proportion of PU.1+ nuclei, representing ~70%. Other smaller clusters were identified as perivascular/border-associated macrophages, inflammatory, MHCII, or proliferating based on differentially expressed marker genes ( Fig.3C , E ; Suppl.Fig.4 ), and did noticeably differ across groups. The proportion of homeostatic microglia was highest in E4 and E4-T2KO mice, followed by mice lacking ApoE, while homeostatic microglia were strongly reduced in TE4 and TE4-T2KO ( Fig.3G ; Suppl.Table 2 ). One microglial cluster expressing predominantly interferon-responsive genes ( Fig.3H , I ) was significantly increased in TE4 and TE4-T2KO mice.

One cluster exhibited similarity with DAM-like microglia as defined in amyloid mice 12 , but with a number of differences, and was enriched in TE4 and TE4-T2KO groups. For discussion purposes we labeled this cluster Tau/ApoE4 reactive microglia (TERM) ( Fig.4A , Suppl.Table 3 ), indicating that these microglia respond to mutant tau pathology and that the reactivity is increased with ApoE4, consistent with our previous observations in TE4 mice 31 . The TERM cluster exhibited up-regulated Lpl and Spp1 , whereas homeostatic markers such as P2ry12 and Sall1 were downregulated ( Fig.4B ). Among the 440 up-regulated genes were genes associated with lysosomal function (e.g., Ctsb, Cd63, Cd68 , and Cstd) ( Fig.4C , D ). Other GO terms included cell migration and cell adhesion, GTPase activity, autophagy, endosomal transport, as well as regulation of cytokine production and neuronal cell death. Previously, we found that proportions of snRNAseq clusters may not reflect intermediate effects on gene expression 31 , so we evaluated expression of genes related to previously reported transcriptomic profiles. We first compared expression of homeostatic markers ( Fig.4E , F ), all of which were reduced in TE4 relative to the other groups. Consistent with this observation, we observed a pronounced decrease in P2RY12 staining in TE4, although this decrease was markedly attenuated in TE4-T2KO mice ( Fig.4G , H ). Thus, TREM2 deficiency preserved homeostatic-associated microglial gene expression in the presence of severe tau pathology and neurodegeneration.

Subsets of genes in DAM in amyloid mice were found to be dependent on TREM2 and others independent 12 . We therefore assessed the expression level of genes based on their previously described TREM2-dependence ( Suppl.Table 4 ). Both TE4 and TE4-TKO mice exhibited elevated expression of Ctsb , Ctsd , Fth1 and Lyz2 compared to TEKO and TEKO-T2KO ( Fig.4I ), suggesting a TREM2-independent microglial response to tau pathology and neurodegeneration. In contrast, we detected lower expression of Spp1 , Lpl , Cd9 , Lilrb4 , Csf1 Ccl6 , and Itgax in TE4-T2KO and TEKO-T2KO ( Fig.4J ), similar to previous reports of TREM2-dependent DAM gene expression in response to amyloid 12 . We also detected a marked decrease in immunostaining for DAM-associated Clec7a in TE4-T2KO and TEKO-T2KO compared to TE4 and TEKO microglia ( Fig.4K , L ). Interestingly, TEKO-T2KO displayed an even stronger downregulation in Clec7a compared to TE4-T2KO, suggesting that the presence of ApoE4 can increase Clec7a+ microglia in the presence of tau pathology despite the absence of TREM2. Importantly, TE4 mice expressed higher levels of reactive microglia markers as Spp1, Lpl, Ctsb, Ctsd, and Lyz2 mRNA compared to TEKO mice ( Fig.4I , J ).

Our snRNA-seq data indicate a reactive microglial phenotype with some DAM-like features in P301S mice that is increased in the presence of human ApoE4. While Trem2 deficiency increased hippocampal atrophy and did not alter tau pathology, we still observed decreased expression of several genes previously described to be TREM2-dependent in both amyloid and tau pathology models. However, there was an increase in TREM2-independent reactive microglial gene expression in TE4-T2KO, suggesting that TREM2-independent microgliosis promotes tau-mediated neurodegeneration in the presence of ApoE4. Interestingly, expression of some TREM2-independent microglia genes ( Ctsd and Ctsb ) was higher in TE4-T2KO mice compared to TE4 mice ( Fig.4I ). Ctsd and Ctsb encode for cathepsins D and B, lysosomal proteases that play roles in protein degradation and immune responses. Reifschneider et al. recently demonstrated that loss of TREM2 rescues hyperactivation of microglia, but not lysosomal deficits and neurotoxicity in models of progranulin deficiency 25 , leading us to hypothesize that TE4-T2KO mice display altered lysosomal phenotypes.

We evaluated expression of lysosomal markers in the DAM-like cluster in addition to Ctsd and Ctsb . Both TE4 and TE4-T2KO, expressed higher levels of Grn , Cd68 , Lamp2 , Timp2 , Galc , and Lipa compared to TEKO mice ( Fig.5A , B ), suggesting higher lysosomal burden in ApoE4-expressing mice with tau pathology. Several lysosomal genes exhibited even higher expression in TE4-T2KO compared to TE4 mice, consistent with lysosomal alterations in TE4-T2KO. We extended these observations by staining for CD68 and found the volume of CD68+ phagolysosomes per microglia was increased in TE4-T2KO mice compared to other groups, including TE4 ( Fig.5C , D ). We additionally found increased microglial LAMP1 volume per cell in TE4 and TE4-T2KO mice compared to TEKO mice ( Fig.5G , H ). GFAP+ astrocytes also displayed upregulated LAMP1 volume per cell in TE4 and TE4-T2KO mice compared to TEKO mice ( Fig.5G , I ), suggesting that the increased lysosomal volume in TE4 and TE4-T2KO mice extends to astrocytes.

We next tested the effect of TREM2 and ApoE4 on lysosomal morphology in vitro in myeloid cells under stress conditions ( Suppl.Fig.2 ). Bone marrow–derived macrophages (BMDMs) from E4, E4-T2KO, EKO or EKO-T2KO mice were incubated for 6 hours in concentrations of CSF1-containing L-cell-conditioned medium (L929) ranging from optimal to starving (10% to 0.5%). When cultured in media containing 10% L929 media, BMDMs displayed similar LAMP1+ vesicles area/cell, independent of the presence of ApoE4 or TREM2. However, upon L929 media starvation, LAMP1+ vesicle area was significantly increased in E4-T2KO and EKO-T2KO, suggesting that, upon stress conditions, TREM2 deletion, but not ApoE4, can enlarge lysosomal volume in myeloid cells, as observed in the TE4-T2KO mice.

To further characterize lysosomal phenotypes in microglia from TE4 mice with or without TREM2, we measured galectin-3, a marker of damaged lysosomes 32 – 34 , in microglia ( Fig.6A , B ). We observed increased microglial galectin-3 in TE4 compared to TEKO mice, independent of the presence of TREM2 ( Fig.6B ), suggesting TREM2-independent and ApoE4-mediated lysosomal damage. We also assessed lipid accumulation in microglial lysosomes using LipidTox stain for neutral lipids in CD68+ microglial phagolysosomes ( Fig.6C , D ). Lysosomes play a major role in lipid metabolism and the maintenance of cellular lipid homeostasis and defective lysosomal lipid metabolism can impair essential lysosomal functions, as seen in lysosomal lipid storage diseases 35 – 37 . Interestingly, a recent report indicated ApoE4-mediated microglial lipid accumulation impairs microglia surveillance of neuronal-network activity 38 . We observed increased lipid accumulation in CD68 + vesicles of microglia in TE4 compared to TEKO mice, independent of the presence of TREM2 ( Fig.6C – D ), suggesting TREM2-independent and ApoE4-mediated lysosomal lipid accumulation potentially exacerbates lysosomal impairments. To further investigate whether lysosomal lipid accumulation depends on ApoE4, we assessed lysosomal LipidTox staining in P301S mice expressing mouse Apoe. While not littermates in our cohort, these mice express the same human tau mutation and are age- and sex-matched to the other mice being analyzed. Interestingly, we observed reduced microglial lysosomal lipid accumulation in P301S mice expressing mouse Apoe compared to TE4 mice. Lipid accumulation in P301S mice expressing murine Apoe was similar to that found in TEKO and TEKO-T2KO mice ( Suppl.Fig.7 ), suggesting that ApoE4 promotes abnormal lysosomal lipid accumulation in P301S mice.

Given that a subset of genes previously described as Trem2-dependent in microglia remain elevated in the TE4-T2KO, we next assessed whether these genes are upregulated through activation of the CLEAR (Coordinated Lysosomal Expression and Regulation) network following disruption of lysosomal function. TFEB regulates lysosomal function and mediates gene expression by binding to E-box sites at promoters of genes belonging to the CLEAR network 39 . We first assessed genes that were upregulated (n=157; padj<0.05) in TE4-T2KO microglia compared to TE4. GO analysis showed an enrichment for terms associated with lysosomes in microglia isolated from the hippocampus of TE4-T2KO mice. Next, we assessed the overlap of upregulated genes in microglial TE4-T2KO with the CLEAR network 39 . We used the interactive TFEBexplorer to identify genes that are predicted to be upregulated by TFEB 40 . Out of the 157 differentially expressed, upregulated genes in TE4-T2KO microglia, 78 (49.7%) were predicted to be upregulated by TFEB ( Fig.6E ; Suppl.Table 5 ), supporting the involvement of the CLEAR network and increased lysosomal burden.

To better understand the mechanisms underlying the augmented brain atrophy in TE4-T2KO mice, we also evaluated whether these mice demonstrate changes in complement components or the NLRP3 pathway, both previously shown to drive tau pathology and tau-mediated neurodegeneration in vivo 41 – 44 . We observed no changes in the level of NLRP3-related caspase 1 and ASC ( Suppl.Fig.5 ). Also, no change was observed in C3 level. However, we observed decreased C1qA levels in TE4-T2KO and TEKO-T2KO mice compared to TE4 mice ( Suppl.Fig.5B ), consistent with previous reports that TREM2 KO decreased C1qa mRNA and protein 22 , 23 and suggesting that more severe neurodegeneration in TE4-T2KO mice is C1q-independent.

To investigate whether the microglia profile in TE4 mice with or without TREM2 was relevant to human AD, we analyzed microglial snRNAseq from the parietal cortex 45 , 46 from AD donors with at least one copy of APOE4 and either TREM2 common variant (CV) or the AD-associated p.R47H or p.R62H variants (E4-T2car) ( Fig.7A ). Microglial gene signature comparison between Micro.0 and Micro.1 clusters confirmed a significantly higher homeostatic gene signature in Micro.0 compared to Micro.1, while Micro.1 exhibited a statistically stronger gene signature score for reactive microglia ( Fig.7B , C ). We then specifically compared gene expression between E4-T2CV and E4-T2car brains in the Micro.1 reactive cluster, similar to our previous analysis in the TE4 mice ( Fig.7D , E ). Surprisingly, the homeostatic gene signature is higher in AD brains with E4-T2CV compared to E4-T2car, with increased expression of resting microglia genes as CX3CR1 and P2RY12 . However, other homeostatic genes as HEXB and TMEM119 were higher in E4-T2car brains, suggesting a complex regulation of homeostatic gene expression in the presence of T2CV and T2car with APOE4 . Nonetheless, E4-T2car do not fully recapitulate the homeostatic signature as the median signature score is <0, consistent with the reactive status of Micro.1. We next assessed the expression level of gene subsets based on the DAM transcriptional profile ( Fig.7D , E ), similar to our analysis in TE4 mice ( Fig.4I , J ). We detected lower expression of AXL , CD9 , SPP1 , LPL , CD9 , LILRB4 , and ITGAX in E4-T2car ( Fig.7D , E ), similar to what we observed in TE4-T2KO. The TREM2-independent DAM-like transcriptomic state was similar between E4-T2CV and E4-T2car brains ( Fig.7D , E ) in accordance with our observations in TE4 vs. TE4-T2KO. Finally, we evaluated lysosomal-associated gene expression in microglia from AD brains. While the gene signature score was slightly lower in AD-E4-T2car, several lysosomal-associated genes were expressed at higher levels in E4-T2car, such as DMXL2 , GALC , GNS , LGMN , SCARB2 and TIMP2 ( Fig.7D , E ), similar to lysosomal alterations in TE4-T2KO. We additionally analyzed a subset of the ROSMAP human pre-frontal cortex snRNA-seq data representing APOE4 donors in both TREM2 categories and confirmed higher TREM2-independent gene signature score in AD-E4-T2car compared to AD-E4-T2CV ( Suppl.Fig.6 ) 47 . There were no statistically significant changes in the homeostatic and TREM2-dependent gene signature score between AD-E4-T2car and AD-E4-T2CV groups ( Suppl.Fig.6D ), but a stronger, while not statistically significant after multiple test correction (nominal p=1.9e-2; adj. p >0.05), lysosomal-associated gene signature score was present in AD-E4-T2car.These human data support findings in TE4 mice suggesting a sustained TREM2-independent microgliosis and lysosomal activity in the presence of ApoE4 and tau pathology despite TREM2 partial loss-of-function.

We previously described that in P301S mice with mouse Apoe, TREM2 loss-of-function decreased synaptic phagocytosis 22 . Given that in TE4-T2KO we observed increased CD68+ phagolysosome volume, we evaluated the number of PSD-95 puncta within microglial CD68 + phagolysosomes. We found significantly more PSD-95 puncta in CD68+ vesicles per microglia in the HC of TE4 mice compared to TEKO, independent of the presence of TREM2 ( Fig.5C – F ), consistent with decreased synaptic density in TE4 and TE4-T2KO. Thus, TREM2 is not required for the phagocytosis of tau-damaged synapses by microglia in the presence of ApoE4.

Previously, we described that TREM2 deletion or loss of function decreased astrogliosis in P301S mice expressing mouse Apoe, concomitant with reduced neurodegeneration 22 , 23 . We therefore evaluated whether astrogliosis is affected in TE4-T2KO mice and observed an increase in the volume covered by GFAP in the HC of TE4-T2KO compared to the TE4 mice, TEKO, and TEKO-T2KO mice ( Suppl.Fig.8A , B ). In addition, because of the previously described function of astrocytic ApoE4 on tau-mediated synaptic loss and neurodegeneration 31 , we also evaluated ApoE levels in glial cells. Interestingly, there was increased ApoE immunoreactivity level per GFAP+ cell and per Iba1+ cell observed in TE4-T2KO compared to TE4 mice ( Fig.8D , E ). We did not observe higher ApoE RNA levels in microglia of TE4-T2KO compared to TE4 mice ( Fig.4I ), possibly suggesting a defect in ApoE4 degradation rather than increased production. Next, we measured whether ApoE4 itself accumulates in the lysosomes of TE4-T2KOs by assessing ApoE colocalized with LAMP1 in microglia and astrocytes in our mice ( Fig.8F – H ). Interestingly, only half of ApoE immunostaining in microglia is found in LAMP1 vesicles in TE4 mice, independent of Trem2 status. Regarding astrocytes, less ApoE colocalized with LAMP1 in TE4-T2KO mice compared to TE4 mice ( Fig.8G ). It is possible that this is because less ApoE4 reaches LAMP1+ vesicles of TE4-T2KO mice, resulting in more ApoE outside this compartment.

## DISCUSSION
In this study, we found that TREM2 deletion did not protect against neurodegeneration or synaptic loss in P301S mice that expressed ApoE4. Rather, hippocampal atrophy and tau phosphorylation were increased in TE4-T2KO compared to TE4, suggesting TREM2-dependent microglial functions were protective in the presence of ApoE4. Further analysis revealed decreased expression of genes previously described as TREM2-dependent but sustained TREM2-independent microglial reactivity concomitant with highly expanded lysosomal volume. These data are surprising, as several studies reported that TREM2 loss-of-function is protective against tau-associated microgliosis and neurodegeneration 21 – 23 . Moreover, upregulation of genes associated with the DAM-like microglial transcriptomic state, such as Cd68 or Clec7a , and suppression of “homeostatic” microglial genes such as P2ry12 , were previously described as strongly correlated with neurodegeneration in P301S mice. However, TE4-T2KO mice exhibited preservation of P2ry12 expression and suppressed Clec7a expression, while still upregulating Cd68 and exhibiting profound neurodegeneration. Our results uncover new complexities in the relationship between ApoE and TREM2 and the overall role of microglia in driving tau-dependent neurodegeneration.

Surprisingly, the protective effects of TREM2-deficiency in P301S mice are completely abolished in the presence of human ApoE4, probably because of differential effects of murine Apoe versus human ApoE4, which share 70% homology at the amino acid level. In amyloid mouse models, ApoE4 strongly increases CAA compared to murine Apoe 48 , likely due to differences in protein-protein interactions between murine Apoe and human ApoE4 with Aβ. While it is unclear whether microglial responses differ with murine ApoE compared to human ApoE4, prior studies suggest ApoE4 alters endosomal/lysosomal trafficking and cholesterol homeostasis 49 – 51 . Altogether, these studies suggest that interpretation of previous studies of microglia in tauopathy need to consider potential differential effects of murine Apoe versus human ApoE4.

We recently showed that selective removal of astrocyte-derived ApoE4, but not ApoE3, reduces tau-associated neurodegeneration 31 . These results suggest that ApoE4 exerts a degree of toxic gain-of-function in relation to other human APOE isoforms. In the present study, TREM2 deletion elevated ApoE4 levels in astrocytes of TE4 mice, which could potentially exacerbate a toxic effect of APOE4 and contribute to the neurodegenerative process in TE4-T2KO mice. Previous studies found that astrocyte APOE4 was upregulated upon microglia depletion using CSF1R antagonists; however, microglial depletion also strongly blocked neurodegeneration. Together, these results suggest that astrocyte-derived ApoE4 may exacerbate toxicity, but that toxicity requires the presence of microglia and specifically TREM2-independent microglial mechanisms.

Several studies have hypothesized functional links between TREM2 and APOE as key regulators of microglial responses to neurodegenerative insults 52 , 53 . Previous studies, along with findings in this study, show knockout of Trem2 or Apoe results in similar preservation of “homeostatic” expression of genes such as P2ry12 or Tmem119 54 . In addition, some microglial phenotypic similarities are observed for Trem2 and Apoe knockout including increased lipid droplet formation in response to demyelinating injury or deficits in microglial clustering around amyloid plaques 14 , 55 , 56 . Some studies have also described a direct interaction between ApoE and TREM2 that could influence phagocytosis or TREM2 signaling 57 , 58 . A few studies have investigated the effect of TREM2 function in the context of APOE3 or APOE4 in AD pathology and in mouse models. Deletion of Trem2 in APPPS1ΔE9 mice that expressed human ApoE3 or ApoE4 found isoform and age-dependent effects of TREM2 function on plaque growth and DAM-gene expression 52 . Analysis of snRNAseq data from human AD patients found that ApoE4 or TREM2-R47H were associated with a reduction in an amyloid-responsive CD163+ microglial population 59 . In contrast to our previous findings in P301S mice that express mouse Apoe, in this study we found that TREM2 knockout alongside ApoE4 expression did not protect against neurodegeneration. Further studies will be required to confirm these results are specific to ApoE4 as opposed to ApoE3 or ApoE2.

Our snRNA-seq data show that tau pathology and neurodegeneration were associated with a decrease in the overall proportion of homeostatic microglia in the presence of ApoE4, independent of the presence of TREM2. This tau-dependent switch from a homeostatic state to a reactive state with some features of a “DAM-like” state was attenuated in TEKO, which also had reduced neurodegeneration. Although the removal of TREM2 did not grossly affect the overall homeostatic and reactive microglia proportions as identified in snRNAseq, removal of TREM2 lowered the expression of several genes such as Lpl , Cd9 or Spp1 previously attributed to a TREM2-dependent transcriptomic state of “Stage-2 DAM” in amyloid models 12 . DAMs were originally identified by comparing scRNA-seq transcriptomes of microglia in the brains of wild-type mice or in an amyloid mouse model and expressed TREM2-dependent and independent genes 12 . We similarly identified TREM2-independent microglial lysosomal-related gene expression in TE4-T2KO mice. Markers associated with TREM2-dependent, DAM-like microglia, such as Clec7a , positively correlate with neurodegeneration in tau models, but are associated with plaque-associated microglia in amyloid models that are generally considered as protective. This raises the puzzling question of how similar microglial transcriptional programs can apparently be associated with protection during amyloid phases of AD pathology and harmful during tau phases. Our results indicate that not all transcriptomic responses associated with the DAM-like state may be important for driving neurodegeneration. Inhibition or knockout of TREM2 in Grn−/− mice enhanced neurodegeneration while attenuating induction of several DAM-associated genes while preserving upregulation of lysosomal and phagocytic-related genes 25 . In addition, non-DAM-associated microglial programs, such as interferon-responsive microglia are implicated in tau pathology, neurodegeneration, and synaptic phagocytosis 9 , 60 , 61 . It will be important to thoroughly characterize the complex functional programs that are upregulated and downregulated within microglia to determine which may be beneficial and which may be injurious.

## Conclusion
We found that in mice expressing ApoE4, TREM2-independent microglial reactivity drives tauopathy-induced brain atrophy and synaptic loss. Although TREM2 deletion decreased the expression of a subset of DAM-like genes, lysosomal-related genes remained elevated in microglia and astrocytes alongside high synaptic phagocytosis, which can explain, at least partially the absence of neuroprotection. Further understanding of the specific microglial profile driving neurodegeneration in AD and in primary tauopathies will be essential to develop novel therapeutic strategies targeting TREM2 and microglia.

## STAR★Methods
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the Lead Contact, David M. Holtzman ( holtzman@wustl.edu ).

This study did not generate new unique reagents.

Mouse snRNA-seq data that support the findings of this study have been deposited in the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database with accession number GSE206368. For Human data: http://ngi.pub/SNARE/

Sequence files, quantified gene expression and clean data from the Knight ADRC are available in NIAGADS ( https://dss.niagads.org/datasets/ng00108/ ).

For the evaluation of the CLEAR network in the microglial upregulated genes in TE4-T2KO mice, we used the interactive TFEBexplorer ( https://tfeb.tigem.it/help.php ) to identify genes that are predicted to be upregulated by the master regulator TFEB.

This study did not generate new original code.

Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this work paper is available from the Lead Contact upon request.

P301S Tau transgenic mice (Stock No. 008169, Jackson Laboratories) harbors 1N4R tau overexpressing the human P301S tau mutation, driven by the mouse prion protein PrP promoter. These mice have been backcrossed to C57BL/6 mice (Stock No. 027, Charles River) more than 10 times. Human ApoE4 KI mice (C57BL/6) were provided by P. M. Sullivan (Duke University) and ApoE KO mice (C57BL/6) were purchased from The Jackson Laboratory (002052). P301S tau transgenic mice were crossed to human ApoE4 mice to generate TE4 mice. Separately, ApoEKO (EKO) mice were crossed to TREM2KO (T2KO) mice to generate ApoE +/− TREM2 +/− , which were then crossed together to obtain EKO-T2KO mice. EKO-T2KO mice were crossed with TE4 mice to generate F1 heterozygotes. F1 × F1 produced the generation of TE4, TEKO, TE4-T2KO, TEKO, TEKO-T2KO, E4, TKO, E4-T2KO, EKO, and EKO-T2KO used in this study. Because male PS19 mice at different ages have greater tau pathology and neurodegeneration, and less variability than female mice, only males were used for analysis in this study. All mice were on a C57BL/6 background. All P301S Tau transgenic mice involved in the final analysis were obtained from the same generation. Littermates of the same sex were randomly assigned to experimental groups. All animal procedures and experiments were performed under guidelines approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) at Washington University School of Medicine. All experiments and data analysis was accomplished by researchers who were completely blind to the genotype of the mice.

At the time of death, mice were anesthetized with i.p. pentobarbital (200 mg/kg). Blood samples were collected in EDTA-treated tubes before cardiac perfusion with 3 U/mL heparin in cold Dulbecco’s PBS. Blood samples were spun down (10 minutes, 2000 g, 4°C), and blood plasma was collected. Brains were carefully extracted and cut into 2 hemispheres. The left hemisphere was collected for immunostaining and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde overnight before being transferred to 30% sucrose and stored at 4°C until they were sectioned. Brains were cut coronally into 50-μm sections on a freezing sliding microtome (Leica, SM1020R) and stored in cryoprotectant solution (0.2 M PBS, 15% sucrose, 33% ethylene glycol) at −20°C until use. The right hemisphere was dissected to isolate the hippocampus and the cortex for biochemical analysis, and the tissue was kept at −80°C until analyzed.

Brain sections were mounted and allowed to dry overnight. The following day, sections were stained in cresyl violet for 6 minutes at room temperature. The slices were then sequentially dehydrated in increasing ethanol concentrations followed by xylene and coverslipped with Cytoseal 60 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 8310–16). Slides were scanned using Hamamatsu’s Nanozoomer microscope at 20X magnification. Hippocampus and EC/PC were traced using the NDP.view 2. Volumetric analysis of the hippocampus and the entorhinal/piriform cortex was performed via stereological methods by assessing sections spaced 300 μm starting from bregma −1.1 mm to bregma −3.2 mm (6 – 8 sections per mouse depending on the severity of brain atrophy). The formula for the volumetric calculation was volume = (sum of area) * 0.3 mm. Three sections, corresponding approximately to bregma coordinates −1.7, −2.3, and −2.9mm were selected to measure the thickness of the dentate gyrus granular cell layer by drawing a scale perpendicular to the cell layer in all 3 slices and taking the average value for each mouse.

Three sections were selected for AT8-biotinylated, AT180, and MC1 immunohistochemical staining. Sections were washed in Tris-buffered saline (TBS) buffer 3 times, for 5 min each. After washing, sections were incubated in 0.3% hydrogen peroxide in TBS for 10 min at room temperature in order to block endogenous peroxidase activity, followed by 3 washes in TBS, for 5 min each. Sections were then blocked with 3% milk in TBS with 0.25% Triton X-100 (TBSX) for 1 h at room temperature to prevent non-specific antibody binding. Then sections were incubated at 4°C overnight with AT8-biotinylated antibody (mouse monoclonal, 1:500), AT180 antibody (mouse monoclonal, 1:500), and MC1 antibody (mouse monoclonal, 1:500), respectively. The next day, after 3 washes in TBS, sections incubated with AT180 or MC1 antibodies were incubated with goat anti-mouse HRP-conjugated secondary antibody (1:500) in 3% milk in TBS with 0.25% Triton X-100 for 1 h at room temperature. For AT8 staining, after washing, sections were incubated in ABC Elite solution (VectaStain, PK-6100) for 1 hour, followed by 3 times washing in TBS. Finally, sections were developed and stained using DAB Peroxidase Substrate, washed, and mounted on slides. After drying overnight, the slides were dehydrated in increasing ethanol concentrations followed by xylene, coverslipped with Cytoseal 60, and scanned using Hamamatsu’s Nanozoomer microscope at 20X magnification. Images were analyzed using the NDP.view 2. Images were further processed and quantified with the use of Fiji software.

For immunofluorescent staining, sections were washed in Phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) 3 times, for 5 min each. After washing, sections were permeabilized with 0.25% PBSX for 30min, followed by 3 washes in TBS, for 5 minutes each. Then sections were blocked in 3% Bovine serum albumin/3% donkey serum in 0.1% PBSX for 1 h at room temperature, followed by overnight incubation at 4°C with primary antibodies (rabbit polyclonal apoE, 1:500; mouse monoclonal GFAP, 1:500; goat polyclonal Iba1, 1:500; rabbit polyclonal Iba1, 1:2000; rabbit polyclonal P2ry12, 1:500; rat monoclonal Clec7a, 1:50; mouse monoclonal LAMP1, 2μg/ml; rabbit polyclonal PSD-95, 1:500; rabbit polyclonal Galectin-3, 1:500 and rat monoclonal CD68, 1:500). The next day, after 3 washes in PBS, sections were incubated with corresponding fluorescence-labeled secondary antibodies for 2 h at room temperature. Then sections were washed in PBS 3 times, for 20 min each, followed by incubation in 0.1% Sudan black solution in 70% ethanol for 10 min. Finally, sections were washed in PBS 3 times and mounted in MWL4–88 with antifade 300 added (9 parts of MWL 4–88 to 1 part antifade 300). To simultaneously stain neutral lipids with immunofluorescently-labeled proteins, we used a digitonin-based buffer to selectively permeabilize cell membranes without disrupting intracellular lipid accumulation 63 . A fresh 5% digitonin solution was prepared just before each stain by adding boiling water to digitonin powder (EMD Millipore, 300410) followed by mixing and heating at 98°C for 15 minutes. This 5% digitonin stock was diluted 1:500 with TBS and filtered using a 0.22 um filter to make the 0.01% digitonin permeabilization solution. After three 5 minutes washes with TBS, floating tissue sections were incubated in permeabilization solution for 10 minutes at room temperature. After three TBS washes, tissues were blocked with 5% donkey serum/TBS for 1 hr at RT and then incubated in primary antibodies in 1% donkey serum/TBS overnight at 4C. After three TBS washes, tissue sections were incubated in a mix of secondary antibodies and the neutral lipid dye LipidTox Green (1:1000, Invitrogen H34475) for 1.5 hr at RT 65 . Following three TBS washes, sections were mounted onto glass slides and imaged via confocal microscopy similarly to other immunofluorescence staining.

Six images per mouse were obtained for analysis. Images in Figures 4G , 4K , 5C , 5G , 6A , 6C , 8A , and 8F were taken using a Leica Stellaris 5 confocal. Images in Figures 1F and 5E were taken using a Zeiss LSM 880 II Confocal with an AiryScan detector. Images in Suppl.Figure 2 were taken by Cytation 5 and analyzed by ImageJ. Quantification of confocal images were performed on a semiautomated platform using MATLAB and Imaris 9.7.1 software to create surfaces of each stain based on a threshold applied to all images and colocalize surfaces. For PDS95, spots were detected for each channel using an x-y size of 0.2 μm, a z size of 0.6 μm, and an automated background subtraction. A 0.1-μm x-y and 0.3-μm z guard was applied to exclude spots intersecting the edge of the image volume. Three images per mouse were obtained in the polymorphic layer of the piriform cortex for this analysis. For quantification of the number of PSD-95 puncta engulfed in CD68+ phagolysosomes, the PSD-95 puncta previously detected was automatically counted within the CD68+ surface per microglia using Imaris 9.7.1 software. Three to five microglia were imaged for each mouse.

Hippocampus was weighed and homogenized using a pestle with 20 μL buffer/mg tissue (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 0.8 M NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 2 μM DTT, 0.1% Sarkosyl, cOmplete and PhosStop [both Roche], and 10% sucrose). Samples were centrifuged for 10 minutes at 10,000 g and 4°C. Supernatant was removed and kept on ice while the pellet was re-homogenized in the same volume of buffer with a sonicator at 30% amplitude, 1 second on/1 second off pulse, for 1 minute, and centrifuged for 10 minutes at 10,000 g and 4°C. The 2 supernatants were pooled together and incubated with 1% Sarkosyl rotating at RT for 1 hour. Samples were then centrifuged for 1 hour at 300,000 g and 4°C. The supernatant is the sarkosyl-soluble fraction (SS). The pellet was washed in PBS, suspended in PBS and sonicated at 30% amplitude, 1s/1s pulse, for 1min (Sarkosyl-insoluble fraction (SI)). SS and SI fractions were frozen until used for ELISA or Western Blot.

The concentration of tau and pTau was quantified as previously described 22 by sandwich ELISA using Tau-5 (in-house antibody) as the coating antibody and human-specific biotinylated HT7 for detection for tau ELISA and using HJ14.5 (in-house p.Thr181-tau antibody) as the coating antibody and human-specific biotinylated AT8 for detection for pTau ELISA. Briefly, 96-well halfarea plates were coated with 20 μg/mL of either HJ14.5 or Tau-5 antibody and incubated at 4°C overnight. The next day, the plate was blocked in 3% BSA (RPI Corp.) in PBS for 1 hour at 37°C. Next, peptide standards and samples were diluted in sample buffer (0.25% BSA/PBS, 1× protease inhibitor, 300 mM Tris pH 7.4, PBS), loaded onto the plate, and incubated at 4°C overnight. On the third day, 0.3 μg/mL of biotinylated AT8 for pTau ELISA (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MN1020B) or biotinylated HT7 for tau ELISA (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MN1000B) was applied to the plate for 1.5 hours at 37°C, and then Streptavidin-poly-HRP-40 (1:10,000 for tau and 1:6,000 for pTau) (Fitzgerald) was applied for 1.5 hours at room temperature. TMB Superslow Substrate solution (MilliporeSigma) was added and the plates were read at 650 nm on a BioTek plate reader after developing for 30 minutes at room temperature. All samples were run in duplicate.

Hippocampus tissues were lysed using cold RIPA buffer. Samples were selected based on the mean values of hippocampal volumes. Complete Protease Inhibitor and phosSTOP Phosphatase Inhibitor were added freshly to RIPA buffer. Tissues were weighed and hand-homogenized in cold RIPA buffer at 20 μl buffer/mg of tissue. Homogenate was centrifuged 30min at 20,000 g at 4°C in a microcentrifuge. Supernatant was collected for western blot. Protein concentration was determined by using BCA Protein Assay Kit. 5 μg of total protein was loaded and separated by 4%–20% Mini-PROTEAN TGX gels in Tris/Glycine/SDS running buffer (Bio-Rad). Gel was transferred on a PVDF membrane using the Trans-Blot Turbo Transfer System (Bio-Rad). The membrane was blocked with 5% milk in TBS with 0.05% Tween (TBST) for 60 min at room temperature, followed by incubation with AT8 antibody (mouse monoclonal, 1:1000), AT180 antibody (mouse monoclonal, 1:1000), total tau Tau5 antibody (mouse monoclonal, 1:1000), ASC (rabbit polyclonal, 1:1000), C3 (rabbit polyclonal, 1:1000), C1qA (rabbit polyclonal, 1:1000), Caspase 1 (mouse monoclonal, 1:1000) and Pan-actin (rabbit polyclonal, 1:5000) at 4°C for overnight. The next day, membrane was incubated with corresponding secondary HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies for 1 h at room temperature. Images were captured using the ChemiDoc MP Imaging System (BIO-RAD) and analyzed with ImageJ.

Plasma NfL concentration was measured with NF-Light Simoa Assay Advantage kit using Simoa HD-X. The measurement was performed following the manufacturer’s instructions.

Hippocampi from 3 mice per experimental group were pooled for single nuclei RNA-seq. Dissected hippocampi were homogenized in lysis buffer (10% Triton X-100, 0.1M DTT, 40U/μL RNasin Promega, protease inhibitor complex, and 2% BSA in PBS) using a Dounce homogenizer for 10 strokes. Samples were incubated for 5 minutes on ice and then centrifuged at 500 × g for 5 minutes at 4μ°C in a tabletop centrifuge. The pellet was resuspended in sort buffer (0.5M EDTA, 40U/μL RNasin Promega, 2% BSA in PBS), transferred to FACS tube, filtered through a 70-μm mesh strainer, and centrifuged at 800 × g for 5 minutes at 4°C in a swinging bucket centrifuge. We resuspended the pellet in sort buffer and stained with the following antibodies: mouse anti-NeuN-Alexa Fluor 488 (1:500; MilliporeSigma; MAB377X [clone A60] and rat anti-SPI1 (PU.1) - PE (1:100; Biolegend 681308 [clone 7C2C34]) for neurons and microglia, respectively. DAPI (1:1,000; BioLegend 422801) was used to label nuclei. After immunolabeling, samples were strained through a 70-μm mesh strainer, washed 1 more time, resuspended in sort buffer, and kept on ice until FANS. PU.1+ nuclei were purified by FANS using a Beckman Coulter Mo-Flo Astrios EQ sorter. After selection of DAPI+ nuclei and exclusion of doublets, we gated on PU.1+ nuclei ( Suppl.Fig.3 ).

The resulting purified nuclei were centrifuged at 800 × g for 5 minutes at 4°C and then resuspended in PBS supplemented with 400 mg/mL bovine serum albumin (Sigma Aldrich, B6917). Individual nuclei were then coupled to beads using the 10X Genomics Chromium controller. Single nuclei sequencing libraries were prepared following the 10X Genomics Protocol using v3.1 chemistry and sequenced to a median depth of approximately 50,000 reads per nucleus using an Illumina NovaSeq 6000 on a rapid run. Data was mapped using Cell Ranger (10X Genomics) to mm10 and analyzed using the Seurat R toolkit for single-cell genomics 67 . We obtained a median of ~500 genes per nucleus. Nuclei with more than 5% of mitochondrial genes and clusters enriched for mitochondrial genes were removed. We also filtered out 1 non-myeloid nuclei cluster based on predominantly neuronal marker expression.

Human parietal cortex tissue samples were obtained from the Knight Alzheimer Disease Research Center (Knight ADRC) and processed as described previously 45 , 46 . We selected from this dataset only donors with neuropathology-confirmed AD and at least one copy of ApoE4. We stratified the donors based on TREM2 genetic status. In total, we selected 6 carriers of TREM2 variants p.R47H or p.R62H (TREM2car; n=642 nuclei) and 9 non-carriers of any known variant in TREM2 associated with AD risk (TREM2CV; n=1,358 nuclei). We normalized the microglia from the snRNA-seq data using the SCTransform function from the Seurat package 69 . We used the Nebula package 71 to perform differential expression analyses using a generalized linear model controlling for donor age of death and sex, but were underpowered to detect significant changes in gene expression for the tested genes individually in activated microglia (Micro.1) across TREM2 genotypes. To circumvent this issue, we estimated gene signature scores for each nuclei using the AddModuleScore function to determine the expression profile of homeostatic microglia, (Trem2-independent), (Trem2-dependent), and lysosomal. This method compares the average gene expression of a gene list of interest to a set of background genes matched by gene expression 72 . For each gene list of interest, we included the same number of background genes. Positive gene signature scores indicate the gene signature is higher than the background genes. To compare signatures across groups, we performed Wilcoxon rank-sum tests, which were adjusted for multiple testing using the Bonferroni correction. For visualization purposes, the SCT-normalized snRNA-seq data was projected in UMAP space using Seurat’s function RunUMAP with principal components 2 through 8. Principal component 1 was highly correlated with barcode sequencing depth (Spearman’s ρ=0.56, p<2.2e-16) and discarded.

We obtained human-mouse orthology data from the Mouse Genomics Informatics database (HOM_MouseHumanSequence.rpt, obtained from http://www.informatics.jax.org/downloads/reports ). Most mouse genes analyzed (38 of 40) had one-to-one orthology with human, and we included both human orthologs for Ccl6 (CCL15 and CCL22) and Ctsl (CTSL and CTSV).

We additionally analyzed the ROSMAP human pre-frontal cortex tissue snRNA-seq data from the Rush Alzheimer’s Disease Center 47 . This data was integrated with the Knight ADRC cohort as described previously 45 . We analyzed a subset of this cohort representing ApoE4 donors in both TREM2 categories (n=5 TREM2CV donors, n=593 nuclei; n=4 TREM2car donors, n=759 nuclei). We performed the gene signature scores analyses as described above.

All tissue samples were obtained for the original studies with informed consent for research use and were approved by the review board of the respective institutions according to the National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer’s Association (NIA-AA) criteria.

All results were reported as mean ± SEM and all statistical analyses were conducted in Prism 9 (GraphPad). Gaussian distribution was evaluated using the D’Agostino-Pearson normality test. Statistical analysis between two groups was performed using a 2-tailed Student’s unpaired t-test under a normal distribution. In case of unequal variances, Welch’s correction was used with the Student’s unpaired t-test. If samples deviated from the normal distribution, statistical analysis was performed using a Mann-Whitney test. Statistical analysis for more than two groups was performed using ordinary one-way ANOVA followed by a Tukey’s post hoc test under a normal distribution. In case of unequal variances, Welch’s and Brown–Forsythe tests were used. If samples deviated from the normal distribution, statistical analysis was performed using Kruskal–Wallis test followed by a Dunn’s post hoc test. p -value less than 0.05 (p < 0.05) was considered as statistic significant difference. *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001; ****, P < 0.0001. The number of mice per group (n) used for each experiment can be found in figure legends. For the supplemental figure 2 , n represents biological replicates in technical duplicates.

## Supplementary Material
Suppl. Table 1: Marker genes (related to Figure 3 )

Suppl. Table 2: Tau/ApoE4 reactive microglia vs. homeostatic genes (related to Figure 3 )

Suppl. Table 3: DEG TE4 vs. TE4-T2KO mice (related to Figures 3 & 4 )

Suppl. Table 4: Comparison Tau/ApoE4 reactive microglia vs. DAM (related to Figure 4 )

Suppl. Table 5: Differential Gene expression list of upregulated genes in microglial TE4-T2KO vs.TE4 that intersect with the CLEAR network (related to Figure 6 )